Landscape Architecture  
as Storytelling
This book introduces students, practitioners, and 
laypeople to a comfortable approach to learning landscape architectural design free of design 
jargon and derived from their existing knowledge. 
A step-by-step process has readers consider their 
knowledge of language as metaphorically related 
to basic design and landscape design. Through 
information delivery and questioning processes, 
readers build on what they already know, their 
tacit understanding of language as applied to 
problem solving and storytelling. Everyone is a 
storyteller.
Taken one step at a time through a three-tiered 
analogy of language, basic design, and landscape 
design, readers learn the makeup and role of such 
design features as points, lines, planes, volumes 
and sequential volumetric spaces that make up 
their worlds. With that, in a sense, new world 
view, and numerous questions and examples, 
readers begin to see that they in fact daily read 
the environments in which they live, work, play, 
raise families, and grow old. Once they realize 
how they read their surroundings they are helped 
to recognize that they can build narratives into 
their surroundings. At that point the existence 
of authored landscape narratives finds readers 
understanding a design process that relies on the 
designer-as-author, landscape-as-text, and participant, user-as-reader. That process has the reader 
write a first- or second-person narrativ
 
e, visually 
interpret the written narrative into a storyboard, 
and turn the storyboard into a final design, the 
physical makeup of which is read by those who 
participate in it.
Bob Scarfo, BLA, MLA, and PhD, is an Emeritus professor with Washington State University. He is a 
registered landscape architect in Washington and Massachusetts. Landscape Architecture as Storytelling is a 
dream come true, one he looks to share through invited workshops and talks.
Landscape 
Architecture as 
Storytelling
Learning Design Through 
Analogy
Bob Scarfo
Cover image: Front cover watercolor by Ken Spiering, sculptor, artist;  
Front cover layout by Robert Parton, designer, illustrator.
First published 2023
by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
and by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2023 Bob Scarfo
The right of Bob Scarfo to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any 
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Scarfo, Robert A. author. 
Title: Landscape architecture as storytelling: 
learning design through analogy / Bob Scarfo. 
Description: New York, NY: Routledge, 2023. | 
Includes bibliographical references and index. | 
Identifiers: LCCN 2022016797 (print) | LCCN 2022016798 (ebook) |  
ISBN 9781032261850 (hardback) | ISBN 9781032261867 (paperback) |  
ISBN 9781003286981 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Landscape design. | Landscape architecture. 
Classification: LCC SB472.45 .S229 2023 (print) |  
LCC SB472.45 (ebook) | DDC 712—dc23/eng/20220722 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022016797
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022016798
ISBN: 9781032261850 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781032261867 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781003286981 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981
Typeset in Adobe Garamond
by codeMantra
Sylvia and Arthur Scarfo
For your pokes and prods; questioning attitudes; boundless patience; laughter; and 
all you endured preparing me for my journey.
Wish you were here to enjoy the results.
vii
Contents
	
	 Figures
ix
	
	 Preface
xv
	
	 Acknowledgments
xxi
	
	 Introduction
2
	
CHAPTER ONE	 Three-Tiered Analogy
16
	 CHAPTER TWO	 A Typology 
36
	CHAPTER THREE	 Points
54
	 CHAPTER FOUR	 Lines
72
	
CHAPTER FIVE	 Planes
100
	
CHAPTER SIX	 Volumes and Volumetric Spaces
138
	CHAPTER SEVEN	 Narrative
158
	CHAPTER EIGHT	 Authoring a Landscape Narrative
208
	 CHAPTER NINE	 Storyboarding: Turning Words into Images
230
	
CHAPTER TEN	 Ethics in Landscape Architectural Design Practice
250
	
	 Epilogue
269
	
	
Bibliography
277
	
	
Index
289
ix
Figures
	0a.1 	
Three-tiered analogy interrelating language, basic design, and landscape design	

xix
	0b.1 	
Three-tiered analogy interrelating language, basic design, and landscape design	

4
	0b.2 	
1890 Acorn Street, Beacon Hill Boston, MA. Courtesy of Historic New England
6
	0b.3 	
2020 Acorn Street, Beacon Hill, Boston, MA. Item ID: 501710236.   
Courtesy Sean Pavone
7
	0b.4 	
The walk at JBR, Dubai Marina, Dubai. Courtesy, Fabio Achilli, Photographer 
(Sept. 3, 2013)
7
	0b.5 	
Analogy’s vertical relationships linking language, basic design, and landscape design
8
	0b.6 	
Visualizing the three-tiered analogy
8
	 1.1	
Bowl and Pitcher, Riverside State Park, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
17
	 1.2	
Three-tiered analogy interrelating language, basic design, and landscape design. 
Drawn by author
18
	 1.3	
Analogy’s vertical relationships linking language, basic design, and landscape 
design. Drawn by author
20
	 1.4	
Talk like a Bostonian. Anonymous Facebook post 2019
22
	 1.5.1	 Cultural depictions of carved bird figures. Courtesy Bryce at Inuit Gifts
22
	 1.5.2	 Cultural depictions of carved bird figures. Courtesy Eleni, Handmade with Love, Greece
22
	 1.5.3	 Cultural depictions of carved bird figures. Courtesy Gabreil Vandervort, ancient 
resource: http://www.ancientresource.com/
22
	 1.6	
Basic elements of design: point, line, plane, volume. Drawn by author
23
	 1.7	
Maslow’s hierarchy with five levels of needs in human motivation. Shutterstock 
ID: 554319703.  Contributor: Iamnee
29
	 1.8	
Vietnam Veterans Memorial: visitors reflected in names of those who served and 
died. Photo by author
31
	 1.9	
Browne’s addition neighborhood, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
31
	 1.10	
Browne’s addition neighborhood, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
31
	 1.11	
Browne’s addition neighborhood, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
32
	 1.12	
Four photos, Manito/Cannon Hill neighborhood, in Spokane, WA’s South Hill. 
Photos by author
32
	 1.13	
Veradale neighborhood, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
33
	 1.14	
Comstock neighborhood, Spokane Valley, WA. Photo by author
33
	 1.15	
Manito/Cannon Hill neighborhood, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
33
	 2.1	
Wooden structures in Provincetown, Massachusetts. Photo by author
39
	 2.2	
Brick buildings in Back Bay, Boston, MA. Shutterstock Item ID: 
7210093.  Contributor: Jorge Salcedo
39
	 2.3	
Chelan Crest, Washington State. Photo by author
40
	 2.4	
Centennial Trail, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
40
	 2.5	
Sidewalk mosaic gives neighborhood a sense of identity. Oberklee, 
Czechoslovakia. Photo by author
40
	 2.6	
Stop sign. Drawn by author
40
x
	 2.7	
Matryoshka Russian (Nesting) Dolls. Courtesy, The Russian Store. https://www.
therussianstore.com/blog/the-history-of-nesting-dolls/. Last viewed February 1, 2022
41
	 2.8	
Aerial photo of University of Michigan “Diag.” Courtesy Michigan Photography, 
University of Michigan
43
	 2.9	
University of Michigan “Diag.” Courtesy Michigan Photography, University of Michigan 43
	 2.10	
Signaling a cold season: warm breadth vaporizing in cold air. Shutterstock ID: 
717801571.  Contributor: Robsonphoto
45
	 2.11	
Warped footbridge planking plank. Photo by author
48
	 2.12	
Cellular structure of wood. Drawn by author
48
	 2.13	
Different media produce varied visual messages: engineered precision to rustic character
48
	 2.14	
Expressive font characteristics
49
	 2.15	
Mature Beech Tree, Manito Park, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
50
	 2.16	
Excerpt of lines 36–60 from William Carlos Williams poem, Rain (1965, 
745–748), displays his effort to visualize rain
51
	 3.1	
Washington Monument, Washington, DC. Photo by author
55
	 3.2	
Dynamics associated with a point (Ching, 1978, 20). Courtesy John Wiley & Sons
55
3.3.1–3.3.3  We take up points in space: limited personal space, midrange social space, and 
lots of public space
56
	 3.4	
Moongate Garden, Smithsonian, Washington, DC. Photo by author
57
	 3.5	
Georgetown neighborhood, Washington, DC. Photo by author
57
	 3.6	
Philadelphia mixed-use neighborhood similar to Georgetown and others: Elfreth’s 
Alley, Philadelphia, PA; Beacon Hill, Boston, MA; French Quarter, New Orleans, 
LA. Photo by author
58
	 3.7	
A campfire as a gathering point. Shutterstock ID: 59945146.  Contributor: 
Alexander Ishchenko
59
	 3.8	
Eiffel Tower, Paris, France. Shutterstock ID 256252072.  Contributor: S-F
61
	 3.9	
Points within points; Duncan Garden, Manito Park, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
62
	 3.10	
Chartres Cathedral, France. Shutterstock ID: 1985033804 France. Contributor: 
Didier Foto
62
	 3.11	
Mont Saint-Michel, Normandy. Shutterstock ID: 1471944950.  Contributor, 
Ilya Shimanskiy
62
	 3.12	
Hatch Memorial Shell, Charles River, Boston, MA. Photo Credit: Susan Pease/
Alamy Stock Photo
65
	 3.13	
Columbia River, George, Washington. Courtesy of Photographer, Anthony Fabrikant
65
	 3.14	
Lines express a message. Courtesy American Society of Landscape  
Architects.
66
	 3.15	
Seattle, WA Space Needle and Mount Rainier in background. Shutterstock ID: 
776152702.  Contributor: Rudy Mareel
67
	 3.16	
Implicit and explicit points. Drawn by author
68
	 3.17	
Brick buildings and tree-lined street in Back Bay, Boston. Shutterstock ID: 
89093767.  Contributor: Jorge Salcedo
69
	 3.18	
Fitz Henry Lane (1804–1865), The Western Shore with Norman’s Woe, 1862, oil 
on canvas. Collection of the Cape Ann Museum, Gloucester, MA. Gift of Isabel 
Babson Lane, 1946 (1147.9)
70
	 4.1	
Q’emiln Park, Post Falls, ID. Photo by author
73
	 4.2	
Trees in a line, Lexington, KY. Photo by author
73
	 4.3	
University of Guelph, ON, Canada Photo by author
76
	 4.4	
Hole-in-the-Ground, South of Cheney, WA. Photo by author
76
xi
	 4.5	
Providence Urgent Care, Spokane Valley, WA. Photo by author
76
	 4.6	
Farm Laneway, Maxville, Ontario, Canada. Photo by author
77
	 4.7	
Multnomah Falls, OR. Photo by author
77
	 4.8	
Radium Hot Springs, Hwy 93, British Columbia, Canada. Photo by author
77
	 4.9	
Pure Contour Drawing by student Kim Hoang. Edwards (1999, 89)
80
	 4.10	
Line variations. Drawn by author
80
	 4.11	
Jet as point; contrails as lines inscribed by points. Photo by author
81
	 4.12	
Snail racing after the receding tide. Photo by author
81
	 4.13	
Thomas Cole (1801–1848). View from Mount Holyoke, Northampton, 
Massachusetts, after a Thunderstorm – The Oxbow. 1836.  Photo Credit: Image 
copyright © The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image source: Art Resource, NY
82
	 4.14	
Spokane, WA, Rockwood neighborhood’s topography gives shape to the Olmsted 
Brother’s road alignments. Photo by author
83
	 4.15	
A contrived pathway along the Spokane River that reacts to no immediate 
features or forces. Photo by author
83
	 4.16	
1748 New Haven, CT. Library of Congress Geography and Map Division; 
G3784.N4S1 1806.L9 and Courtesy John Reps’ Estate
83
	 4.17	
1722 Boston, MA. Library of Congress Geography and Map Division; G3764.B6 
1725.B6 and Courtesy John Reps’ Estate
83
	 4.18	
Simonds’ stream and pedestrian traffic analogy (2006, 4th ed., p. 228). Courtesy 
McGraw Hill
84
	 4.19	
Implied line of benches and explicit walkway edge line. Rose Garden, Manito 
Park, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
84
	 4.20	
Tree-lined Manito Blvd, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
85
	 4.21	
Turning eyes from looking straight ahead to the right and seeing what Cullen 
calls “Netting”: shifting view from trees as wall to trees as frame, Spokane, WA. 
Photos by author
87
	 4.22	
Approach to Vaux-le-Vicomte in Maincy, Ile-de-France. Google Maps Copyright 
2022 Google Maps/GoogleEarth
87
	 4.23	
A seam: Woornerf, London, UK. Shutterstock ID: 1066971254
88
	 4.24	
Kashan, city plan with bazaar route seen as horizontal line moving through open 
areas. Courtesy Nader Ardalan and Laleh Bakhtiar (1973, 92) and University of Chicago
89
	 4.25	
Point-line concept found in the bazaar (Ardalan and Bakhtiar, 1973, 89). 
Courtesy Nader Ardalan and Laleh Bakhtiar and University Chicago Press
90
	 4.26	
CN Tower, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Shutterstock ID: 776152702. 
Contributor: jessica.kirsh
91
	 4.27	
Arc de Triomphe, Paris, France. Contributor: Eric Isselee. Shutterstock  
ID: 1867822423 Inc
92
	 4.28	
Dupont Circle, Washington, DC. Photographer Julia Armstrong, Aero-Imaging, Inc.
92
4.29.1 and 4.29.2  The Watts Towers in Los Angeles, CA. Once condemned now on 
the National Historic Register. Built mostly of found objects by Simon Rodia 
between 1921 and 1954.  Left: Shutterstock ID: 98082746, Contributor: James 
Michael Dorsey; Right: Shutterstock ID: 1400348636.  Contributor:  
Walter Cicchetti
92
4.30.1 and 4.30.2  Sea wall vs. ocean, San Padre Island, TX. Photos by author
96
	 5.1	
Rainbow Road, Reykjavik, Iceland. Photo by author
101
	 5.2	
Three planar features: horizontal water, vertical rocks, and overhead sky – Banks 
Lake, WA. Photo by author
101
xii
	 5.3	
Kindred Spirits (1849). By Asher Brown Durand. Oil on canvas. Courtesy 
Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art
102
	 5.4	
Mandala. Shutterstock Item ID: 671473225.  Contributor: Katika
104
	 5.5	
Yin-Yang. Shutterstock Item ID: 1457918075. Contributor: mrjohnblack
104
	 5.6	
Proxemics. Drawn by author
106
	 5.7	
Burle Marx – Portuguese stone pavement mosaic in the Carioca square.  
Alamy Stock Photo ID: 2HEFT4N. Credit: Donatas Dabravolskas
108
5.8.1 and 5.8.2  Leaf shadows: left (in daylight) and right (at night under lights). Photos by author 108
5.9.1–5.9.4  Drawings and description of the Katsura Imperial Villa Tea Garden are those of  
Junko Miyata from Katherine Benzel’s The Room in Context (1998, 173–175).  
Courtesy of McGraw Hill
111
	 5.10	
Message delivery sequence as you move toward a hillside. Drawn by author
112
	 5.11	
Lines and objects indicative of emotions. Simonds (2006, 159). Courtesy McGraw Hill
113
	 5.12	
New England village. iStock ID:824654196.  Photo: Kirkikis
114
	 5.13	
“Palouse” Southeast Washington State. Courtesy of Spokane, WA. Photographer  
Dan Price
114
	 5.14	
SKI Kansas. Drawn by author
115
5.15 and 5.16  Seawall, San Padre Island, Texas, 1978.  The seawall reminds me of  
Ernest Callenbach’s statement, “Nature bats last.” Photos by author
115
5.17–5.19  Providence Sacred Heart Hospital Healing Garden, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
117
	 5.20	
Enclosing vertical features. Drawn by author
120
	 5.21	
Plexiglass Floor, Governor Calvert House, Annapolis, MD. Photo by author
121
	 5.22	
Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Shutterstock ID: 121748179. Contributor: MDart10
122
	 5.23	
Sky as an overhead plane. Photo by author
122
	 5.24	
Piazza del Campo, Sienna. Shutterstock ID: 1946041681.  Contributor:  
Diego Mariottini
123
5.25.1–5.25.3  Overhead tree canopy densities. Photos by author
126
	 5.26	
The sunlit intersection up ahead signals cross traffic. Photo by author
126
	 5.27	
What shadow patterns do for asphalt. Photo by author
129
	 5.28	
Allee of Linden trees line a tree lined footpath through park. Shutterstock ID: 
632149790.  Contributor: dugdax
129
	 5.29	
Cone of vision. Courtesy, the Art Department, Brigham Young University-Idaho
130
	 5.30	
Human field of vision. Courtesy Tara et al. (2021)
131
	 5.31	
Sensed enclosure – alleyway experience of enclosing walls vs. comfortable plaza or patio  
vs. limited to no sense of enclosure. Drawn by author
131
5.32.1–5.32.3  Vertical planes helped with vegetation – (left and center) walkway between  
parking garages; (right) parking lot, Cathedral of Our Lady of Lourdes, Spokane, WA.  
Photos by author
133
	 6.1	
West entry to Duncan Garden, Manito Park, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
139
	 6.2	
Thinking spatially with pop-up books. Amsterdam Holland City Skyline.  
Shutterstock: ID: 1544575148.  Contributor: ShustrikS
140
	 6.3	
Trees as solid and see-through features in plan view (Arnold, 1991, 75). Courtesy 
John Wiley & Sons
141
	 6.4	
Washington State University, Spokane Campus. Photo by Campus Photographer 
Cori Kogan
144
	 6.5	
Part 1 (6.5.1–6.5.5): serial vision as narrative sequence. Photos by author. Part 2 
(6.5.6–6.5.8): serial vision as narrative sequence. Photos by author
146
xiii
	 6.6	
Visual illusion. Iceland uses optical illusion to slow traffic. Courtesy of Gautur 
Ivar Halldorsson, photographer and owner Vegamálun GIH
147
6.7.1–6.7.3  Three social spaces, similar directional messages. Photos by author
150
	 7.1	
Horseshoe Lake, Deer Park, WA. Photo by author
159
	 7.2	
Grand Teton National Park, WY. Photo by author
159
	 7.3	
Wave Action, Plymouth Beach, MA. Photo by author
160
	 7.4	
Sedona’s Chapel of the Holy Cross. Shutterstock ID: 2094954961 Contributor: 
Angel DiBilio
162
	 7.5	
Stonehenge, a prehistoric monument in the fields of Wiltshire, England. Photo by author
165
	 7.6	
Machu Picchu is a 15th-century Inca citadel. Photo by Karen Shields
165
	 7.7	
The Water Chain at the Villa Lante, Bagnaia, Viterbo, Italy. Photo by author
166
	 7.8	
Message delivery sequence. Drawn by author
168
	 7.9	
Canyon Story in Reading the Landscape of America (Watts, 1975, 50). Courtesy of 
the Estate of May Theilgaard Watts
169
	 7.10.1–7.10.5  A succession of arrival points providing for a holistic experiential flow. 
Hallgrimskirkja Lutheran (Church of Iceland), Reykjavik, Iceland. Photos by author
175
	 7.11	
The Redevelopment of Circleville, Ohio 1837-1856 (Reps, 1965, 302). Courtesy 
John Reps’ Estate
178
	 7.12	
Three domains of knowledge
182
	 7.13  	 The composition of narrative structure (Chatman, 1980, 22-25). As paraphrased 
by the author
193
	 7.14  	 Elements of narrative theory (Chatman, 1980, 26). Courtesy Cornell University Press
194
	 7.15	
Design Process Sampler. Prepared by author
199
	 7.16	
Green area by Hirschhorn Museum, Washington, DC. Courtesy of James Urban, 
the Office of James Urban, FASLA
205
	 8.1	
Paley Park, New York City. Photo by author
213
	 8.2	
Pyg Track, Mount Snowdon, Wales; Shutterstock ID: 1153739200
217
	 8.3	
Wall is a noun. The modifying adjectives are the wall’s treatment or character: 
stone, poured concrete, vegetated. Photos by author
219
	 8.4	
Lines and objects indicative of emotions. Simonds (2006, 160). Courtesy McGraw Hill
221
	 8.5	
Aerial of Healing Garden Site; Google Maps; Imagery ©2022 CNES/ Airbus, 
Maxar Technologies. U.S. Geological Survey Map data © 2022
225
	 8.6	
Composite of original healing garden site. Looking south into the back half of the 
original site. Photos by author
226
	 8.7	
Note taking worksheet for narrative reviewers. Prepared by author. Credit: Kyaw 
	 9.1	
The Beekeeper Storyboards. Courtesy, Lynne G. Hood, illustrator, animator, author
232
	 9.2	
Student’s simple storyboard panel. Courtesy Jena Jauchius
234
	 9.3	
Student’s simple storyboard panel: top sketch; Courtesy Jena Jauchius
234
	 9.4	
Student’s simple storyboard panel: middle sketch; Courtesy Jena Jauchius
234
	 9.5	
Student’s simple storyboard panel: bottom sketch; Courtesy Jena Jauchius
234
	 9.6	
Emotion Matrix
236
	 9.7	
Sensory receptors in the skin. Shutterstock Contributor: Designua
237
	 9.8	
Frederic Edwin Church’s 1857 painting Niagara measures 3.3′ tall by 7.5′ wide. 
Courtesy National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC
238
	 9.9	
The ecological approach to visual perception. Gibson (1979, 199). Courtesy of 
Taylor & Francis Publishers
240
	 9.10	
Message delivery when moving toward a hillside. Drawn by author
240
xiv
	 9.11	
Message delivery when moving toward a hill’s crest. Drawn by author
243
	 9.12	
Defining urban open space with trees as edge (Arnold, 1991, 59). Courtesy Wiley 
Publishers
244
	10.1	
Healing garden design keyed to Ken Spiering’s Sketches
255
	10.2	
A – Garden viewpoint: looking north along west side of garden. Courtesy Ken Spiering
256
	10.3	
B – Garden viewpoint: looking north along east side of garden. Courtesy Ken Spiering
256
	10.4	
C – Garden viewpoint: looking south from north side of garden. Courtesy Ken Spiering 257
	10.5	
D – Garden viewpoint: looking west to basalt outcrop and waterfall
257
	10.6.1	 Preschool floor plan (Johnson, 1982, 34). Courtesy of the Anthropological Quarterly
260
	10.6.2	 Third grade floor plan (Johnson, 1982, 38). Courtesy of the Anthropological Quarterly
261
	10.6.3	 Fifth- and sixth-grade floor plan (Johnson, 1982, 39). Courtesy of the 
Anthropological Quarterly
261
	10.7	
Schon’s normative design domains (1983, 96). Courtesy Hachette Books Group
261
	10.8	
Integrus architecture. Report cover page, Educational Specifications for On Track 
Academy. Courtesy Integrus Architecture & Spokane Public Schools
262
	10.9	
Friends of the garden fund raising event, June 28, 2017.  Photo by author
266
	10.10	
Friends of the garden fund raising event, June 28, 2017.  Photo by author
267
	11.1	
Exley Falls, Horseshoe Lake, WA; Courtesy Karen Shields
269
	11.2	
Spangle, WA. Photo by author
271
	11.3	
Sunrise on the Palouse, Eastern, WA. Courtesy Evelyn Georgeson, Spokane, WA
272
	11.4	
Red River Gorge, KY. Photo by author
273
	11.5	
Providence sacred heart healing garden, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
274
	11.6	
El Potrero Chico’s limestone cliffs and spires up to 2,000′ in the Mexican state of 
Nuevo León. Photo by author
274
	11.7	
Manito Blvd, Spokane, WA. Photo by author
275
	11.8	
Salem’s Gateway to the Far East Fountain, Salem, MA. Shutterstock ID: 
1804746124.  Contributor: Wangkun Jia
276
xv
Preface
Unlike the old adage that for medicine to be considered good it must taste bad, learning design 
doesn’t have to be a traumatic experience. Yet, 
ask any number of landscape architectural, architectural, or interior design students, or for that 
matter faculty, and you’ll likely get nods of agreement that their undergraduate, and sometimes 
graduate, learning experiences were fraught with 
discomfort, angst, and self-doubt. Contrary to 
their reactions, learning to be a landscape architect can be both comfortable and fun if we follow 
the lead of many writers. I have always been 
pulled to the nature writers and those non-nature 
writers who include nature, almost as a character, in their writings. The number of fiction and 
non-fiction writers who realize the connections 
between language and landscape helps us learn 
about landscape architecture through language. 
Elizabeth Kryder-Reid notes “The study of landscapes strikes at the core of how we make sense 
of our world: how our lives are permeated by our 
physical environment, perhaps as fundamentally 
as by the language we speak” (1996, 228).
With the aid of metaphors, similes, and analogies we can move from what we know, through 
a series of small steps, to an understanding of 
what we don’t know. This way of learning, as 
an exploration of the unknown, is comfortably experienced through a reliance of one’s past 
experiences. However, there is no escaping the 
fact that learning something new means delving 
into the unknown. For most, there will always 
be moments of discomfort. There’s bound to be 
a sense of uncertainty as you test new skills and 
knowledge in front of others, particularly a teacher 
and a roomful of your classmates. But, when we 
start with something we already know how to do, 
like reading, writing, and telling stories, learning 
design occurs through activities and skills most of 
us have practiced for years.
MY STORY
As an undergraduate student, my introduction to 
landscape architectural design came as a shock. I 
felt I’d been taken to the end of a dock, thrown 
into the water, and as I flailed about trying desperately to keep my head above water, I was told 
to swim. I believed, at the time, that I had no 
prior experience in design problem solving, design 
process, and design principles. I was wrong. I had 
been solving design problems throughout my life, 
but wasn’t made to realize that at the time. When I 
transferred into the landscape architectural design 
program at the University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst I brought with me a strong math, science 
background that had just been capped off with a 
year of Civil Engineering. Confronted with my 
first landscape design problem, the only question 
I knew to ask was, “So, what’s the formula?” My 
landscape architecture instructor’s answer brought 
my faith in the value of formulas face to face with 
the ambiguous world of design.
Among the characteristics 
identifying a profession as a 
distinctive community: “within 
the areas of communal action 
there is a common language, 
which is understood only 
partially by outsiders.”
(Goode, 1957, 194)
I distinctly remember being awed by the design 
knowledge and aesthetic wisdom expressed by my 
instructor. After all, I didn’t understand anything 
he was saying; therefore, I assumed it had to be 
important and worth my learning. His strongly 
xvi
stated response convinced me I was ignorant of 
how to produce a new landscape and unaware of 
the arduous journey about to unfold before me. 
Even so, I knew I was lucky to be in the Bachelor 
of Landscape Architecture program. I nodded in 
agreement to all that I heard in a desperate struggle to appear creative, intelligent, and technically 
competent. 
Invigorated by my instructor’s energy, I 
unrolled my trace paper expecting a design to flow 
from my pencil. Nothing flowed. Not only was 
my pencil not responding, I felt I had hit a mental 
block the size of a wall. I was confronted by the 
magnitude of the potential held on the surface of 
that blank piece of paper. I felt that my anxiety 
must be the state of mind that characterized what 
design was all about. I began to think design must 
be a Zen thing. At just the right moment of crisscrossing speculations – Slap! – and suddenly I’d 
fathom design, and just as quickly set it to paper. 
I’d be one with the space to be designed and with 
the people intended to use it. Still, a part of me 
thought, “So, what’s the formula?”
Lawyers [read designers] run 
an entire set of legal [read, 
design] institutions that are 
by definition supposed to be 
responsible and responsive to 
the public. Those institutions 
are not in fact accessible to 
the public, however, in part 
because the language used in 
the interaction that maintains 
them is impenetrable.
(Philips, 1982, 183)
Thus, as a first-year landscape architecture 
student I began, and have continued over the 
years, to search for a formula that would simplify 
and clarify design as a process and a practice. 
During 40 years as a teacher and a designer three 
insights influenced my search. First, in order to 
“do design” I must understand why people make 
the spaces that they do for themselves. How do 
personal and public spaces relate to those who 
use them? I began to recognize that design is, as 
John Simonds says, made of experiences and not 
things (1961, 225). Yet, in developing the kinds 
of spaces/places that provide those experiences 
with which people identify and find meaningful, or full of meaning (Norberg-Schultz, 1980), 
people strive to exhibit aspects of themselves in 
the form, character, and content of their surroundings. This sense of being integral with your 
surroundings is embodied in the realizations 
of Clare Cooper Marcus’s House as a Mirror of 
Self (1995), Norberg-Schultz’s The Concept of 
Dwelling (1985), J. B. Jackson’s The Ghosts at 
the Front Door (1977), and Dennis Wood and 
Robert Beck’s Home Rules (1994). 
Later, as a teacher, my second insight related 
to my ability to communicate my understanding of design in ways that go beyond a one-way 
­teacher-student (or client) transmission of knowledge. Students’ active participation is paramount 
in their learning. I don’t want to “talk at” students. I want them to be active participants in 
their own learning experiences, ideally while they 
contribute to improving their communities. For 
many of my students, the community was their 
classroom. Critical to activating students’ learning is the ability to organize and deliver engaging 
exercises that trigger learning experiences.
Over the years my curiosity with design as 
practice, as teaching, and as learning merged into 
what I came to call The Analogy, or how to learn 
design based on how we learned to read and write. 
The metaphor of landscape as a medium of purposeful expression has served me well as both an 
educator and a design practitioner. I became more 
and more engrossed in the idea that the landscape 
expresses messages. As I pieced together The 
Analogy I realized that it isn’t as much language 
that binds us but how we use it. As social products 
our landscapes, like letters, reports, notes, memos, 
and texts and tweets, evidence the relationships 
that bind us with each other, with our environments, and with each other’s environments. 
Within the metaphor of reading landscapes 
my initial impression was that of the landscape 
xvii
as text. But, even then my first impression felt 
incomplete. What I realized was that I saw the 
landscape as expressing statements here and there, 
I had not yet realized that the landscape was 
more a continuous sequence of developing messages. The statements were part of a larger story, 
a narrative. Fortunately, the idea of landscapeas-text evolved into a realization of landscape-as-­
narrative, a progressive sequence of contextually 
related and developing messages, a story. The real 
power of a landscape lay in its sequential delivery 
of information or what we can call storytelling. 
The landscape-as-narrative realization convinced 
me of the value of The Analogy as a tool for learning, and as a foundation upon which to build my 
understanding of how to develop good landscape, 
architectural, and interior designs.
The third insight driving my exploration 
of design as process and product was my need 
to comprehend what constitutes good design. 
Landscape narrative had to be not just readable 
but also meaningful to the users as readers. For 
years I felt good design was an orchestration of 
our senses in the production of experiences. 
Good, and appropriate, experiences could not be 
just any collection of experiences, they had to be 
particular sequences with which people identified and in which they found meaning and to an 
extent maintained a sense of personal and social 
orientation. The form and content of the environments I designed had to be meaningful to people, 
it meant that they had to be an outgrowth of 
the people’s cultural history and personal biography. My feelings in this matter have since 
been validated in the works of architects (Bonta, 
1979; Greene, 1962; Norberg-Schulz; 1985; 
1980), landscape architects (Church, 1983; 
Halprin and Burns, 1974; Lynch, 1972), planners (Aminzadeh et al., 2016; Rapoport, 1982; 
1969), philosophers (Berleant, 2005; Brady, 
2005; Light, 2005), sociologists, and social 
geographers (Barthes, 1982; Relph, 1987; Tuan, 
1978; Williams, 1973; Wolff, 1981).
My understanding that design is deeply 
related to and draws upon people’s backgrounds 
convinced me that most 18-year-olds, or university freshmen of any age, whether small-town 
born and bred or well-traveled, have all the necessary experiences to become a superior designer. 
Tapping into my students’ backgrounds was the 
key to their learning to do landscape architectural 
design well. The Analogy gave me the means to 
tap into those backgrounds. No matter where 
they had grown up they had read landscapes: as 
pedestrians, bicyclists, skiers, and drivers of cars, 
motorcycles, and trucks. I could use The Analogy 
to awaken their taken-for-granted experiences 
and use their new awareness as a starting point to 
learning to be a designer. The Analogy prompted 
students to relate their personal experiences to 
design theory, process, principles, and products. With the help of The Analogy design was 
no longer learned in a vacuum. Learning design 
illuminated processes integral to their daily lives. 
Students became personally involved in what they 
were learning. Abstract ideas were tied through 
interpretation to the physical, measurable world. 
Design was learned through one’s reflections on 
and interpretations of daily life and the routines 
that made up what they felt as personally meaningful. 
Even with only fading memories of elementary English, the language metaphor allowed me, 
with a great sense of security, to unpack this thing 
called design. Letters of the alphabet, words, sentences, grammar, syntax, and narrative forms and 
strategies each provided additional metaphors 
that further illuminated design elements, rules, 
principles, and the products to which they gave 
rise. The parts of The Analogy, its typology, the 
message content and delivery systems that it illuminates, and the deeper symbolic significance 
of landscapes that it permits access to helped 
me understand, translate, interpret, and learn 
landscape architectural design. Through years of 
academic design projects and workshops with 
architecture, landscape architecture, land planning, nursing, and gerontology students, I now 
know that it can do the same for students and 
practitioners alike. When we develop designs that  
touch a person’s heart we instill legacies, long-­
lasting products that leave a place capable of being 
as good, if not better, than it was. That is what 
The Analogy offers.
Bob Scarfo
December 1996
xviii
A LATER INSIGHT INTO THE 
ANALOGY
I went back to school in 1987 to both focus on 
and get assistance in understanding the idea of 
landscape-as-text, designer-as-author, and useras-reader. It was a period of realizations. First, 
the importance of realizing and admitting to 
what we are born into. Second, that landscapes 
are not encountered as individual, freeze-frame 
plan-view drawings but as eye-level experiences. I 
came to realize there is more certainty to life than 
just death and taxes. We are born into a family, 
a social group, and a language. Well, actually we 
are born into and grow up with a number of languages, each with its respective signs and symbols. 
There are sensory languages beyond our basic five, 
such as proprioception, vestibular, and haptic. 
However, our unpacking of The Analogy will 
stick with our five primary senses: visual, auditory, olfactory, tactile, and gustatory. The signs 
and symbols “read” by these senses individually 
and in combination are what we rely on for personal safety as we move about landscapes, buildings, and interiors. The various expressions of our 
sensory vocabularies give content and character 
to our environments and, in turn, our feelings in 
the places we move about, e.g., happiness, sorrow, 
sensuality, mystery, wonder, and more. Landscape 
Architecture as Storytelling explores, interprets, and 
applies these languages as they express themselves 
through landscape narratives. Landscapes were to 
be experienced at eye level as sequential progressions. But, the question then became, “How do I 
not only teach it but justify it?”
My learning about landscape narratives, 
the ways in which we read them, and the ways 
in which we, as designers, can author them as 
environmental designs, was accomplished in 
three stages: first, as explored through a threetiered analogy; second, in the application of The 
Analogy to the authoring of a landscape narrative; 
and third, by interpreting the narrative through 
storyboarding before moving to a final design.
For me, the first stage interrelated a threetiered analogy made up of language, basic design, 
and landscape design. I learned the language tier 
provides a simplified review of what makes up 
our language as it is written and spoken. Through 
that review I explored the structural aspects of 
language: letters of the alphabet and words, how 
through syntax and grammar they become sentences, then paragraphs, and finally a story or narrative. The second tier metaphorically relates the 
structural aspects of language to those found in 
basic design: point, line, plane, and their coming 
together as an actual or implied three-dimensional 
volume or sequence of volumes. Why basic design 
as the second tier? I found it to be a comfortable step in coming to understand connections 
between language and built environments. Also, 
because it is one of the fundamental building 
blocks of all forms of environmental design and, 
as you will see, the parts that make up language 
are easily related to those making up basic design. 
The Analogy’s third tier, again easily, and metaphorically, related basic design to language and 
was comprised of the primary features that make 
up landscape design: objects in the landscape, 
linear features, ground, vertical, and overhead 
planes, and finally the volumetric spaces making 
up entire landscapes. At this stage in my developing understanding of The Analogy I was asked a 
question by the late Harry Porter back in 1989 
at the University of Virginia: “So, what do we do 
with The Analogy and its parts?” What do we do 
with this understanding of the fact that landscape 
features express, in a sense, statements?
Honestly, when Harry asked me that question, 
I didn’t know. I was too excited about what I was 
learning at the time, to have gone any further. It 
took a few years to answer Harry’s question. But 
he’d planted a seed that grew into what I came 
to learn about design and about my purpose as a 
professional landscape architect. It was worth the 
wait. The simple answer to Harry’s question, as an 
interpretation of the three tiers, is that landscape 
designs express narratives read by their users. We 
read our environments. Stated another way, both 
laypeople and professionals author environments. 
My home has a public face and a private face. 
Features tell visitors how to safely get to the front 
door or through the side yard to the back where 
the deck party is taking place. 
xix
So, as I began to realize that people can, and 
do, author the spaces in which they relax, play, 
work, study, raise families, and retire, I also began 
to realize that as a professional designer I could 
purposefully author narratives that then became 
my designs. My students helped me a lot at this 
point. In my efforts to answers students’ questions about how to identify what should make up 
their designs I realized the role of themes (e.g., 
happiness, comfort, mystery, spirituality) and the 
qualities of coherency, consistency, and continuity that a thematic approach brings to the design 
process. The design process was no longer a selection of objects and spaces “played with” until they 
looked good. Once a theme was identified, the 
design process became a more logical and sequential series of steps leading to a final design. But, 
where does a design’s theme come from? I found 
an answer to that in John Simonds realization 
that we design experiences, not spaces, places, and 
things (Simonds, 1961, 225).
Since 1989, I frequently found myself thanking Harry Porter for his question. The answer to it 
here provides an understanding of landscape narrative as developed by a designer-as-author giving 
rise to a landscape-as-text. That text is not just any 
text. It has a narrative form applied to landscape 
design and a theme that guides the selection of 
landscape features, their materials, the materials’ 
finishes, and their sequencing as they convey a 
narrative. With some unexpected help, answering 
Harry’s question, “So, what do we do with The 
Analogy and its parts?” took much less time than 
my previous efforts to respond to his question. 
Fortunately, the twists and turns of my life 
found me first as a student of and later good 
friends with the person who would become my 
mentor, John Conron. John was an English professor at Clark University in Worcester, MA. 
While working on my PhD in Social Geography, 
I took every course John taught. Through a close 
reading of literature, poetry, and paintings John 
helped me learn more about landscape architecture than anyone else. Through John I learned 
to see narratives. In that learning process I developed what is the third stage of this book, a way 
to apply storytelling to the development of landscape designs (or for that matter architectural and 
interior designs, too) through the authoring of 
narratives. 
Again, in three steps – honest I’m not married 
to the number three, it just seems to happen that 
way – we follow an application of The Analogy to 
the development of the design of a healing garden 
at a hospital in Spokane, Washington: the authoring of a narrative, the interpretation of that narrative into a storyboard, and the interpretation of 
the storyboard into a final design. This sequence 
Figure 0a.1 Three-tiered analogy interrelating language, basic design, and landscape design.
xx
was reinforced with the outcomes of a number of 
week-long workshops between 2001 and 2004 
with landscape architecture students at Cal Poly 
Pomona. 
Will what you get here be complete, nicely 
packaged? No. There remain plenty of opportunities for more study, more research. As far 
as I know only a few design firms employ narration and storyboarding. My hope is that a 
deeper, more complete understanding of what 
Landscape Architecture as Storytelling can bring 
to learning landscape architectural design will 
come from undergraduate senior projects, 
master’s students’ theses, and doctoral students’ dissertation research. And should you 
want help defining your questions, identifying how to expand upon The Analogy and the 
­narrative-storyboard- design process, I look 
forward to hearing from you and working together 
in a workshop or seminar to build on what  
you already know. The journey is worth the 
effort.
Bob Scarfo
October 2019
xxi
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I am grateful for having met 
John Conron, an English professor at Clark 
University in Worcester, Massachusetts. John’s 
passion to illuminate and follow the influences of 
the picturesque as a landscape genre caused me to 
learn and see my profession anew. I considered 
John my mentor and still use his questioning attitude as my guide. John was passionate about the 
American landscape and delighted in that of all 
the things that might drop into his lap it would be 
a landscape architect. He is the lynchpin around 
which my efforts to understand narrative in its 
many forms continue to evolve.
Second among those who challenged me is the 
late Harry Porter. At the conclusion of a talk I gave, 
he asked one question. “Now that you’ve given 
me the three-tiered analogy, what do I do with 
it?” That’s what I heard. What he actually asked 
was, “What’s the moral of the story?” Honestly, at 
the time, I didn’t know. His questioning of what 
was then a barely developed Analogy was like a 
pebble in my shoe. Efforts to answer his question 
prepared me for what John Conron brought into 
my life.
My gratitude for Mom and Dad is never-­
ending. They bear so much of the responsibility 
for who I am, especially in regard to my love of 
reading. I can honestly say that as a youngster I 
didn’t appreciate Sylvia and Arthur each night 
when they sat with me for an hour and had me 
read out loud. I hated reading. Yet they stuck with 
me. Through only the kinds of complaints a child 
can produce they provided the kind of love only 
parents can provide. They put up with me. And 
they too, like Harry Porter, helped prepare me to 
recognize, maybe not understand, what I needed 
to learn, who I needed to draw into my life, and 
what questions I needed to ask.
And then there is Angelina Alessandroni, 
Nana, who instilled in me a curiosity that manifest itself as a love of learning for the sake of 
learning. One day I found Nana sitting on the 
front lawn with three of my high school buddies. 
They were talking sex, drugs, and rock and roll. I 
later asked her why. Her casual response was, “I 
may not agree with what I’m hearing but I have 
to know about these things.”
Thank you Richard Forster for introducing me 
to the C. G. Jung Foundation in Toronto and all 
the magnificent speakers. Learning about Jung’s 
personality types helped me begin to realize the 
degree to which the depth and character of a landscape design must reflect the depth of the personalities of those who experience it. And thank you 
Richard for introducing me to the late Marion 
Woodman. I am grateful for Marion agreeing to 
take me on as an analysand for the year before 
leaving Canada to start my PhD. Not only do 
I look back at that year as the most psychically 
fulfilling and comfortable but also as the most 
enriching as to how to improve my teaching and 
working with public clients.
Thank you Ted Baker, posthumously. Ted was 
the most personable, huggable curmudgeon I’ve 
ever known. His anguish over what drove good, 
no great, education and what was called for by 
landscape architects in public practice drove 
many hours of in-person and on-the-phone discussions. So enriching was Ted’s need to live up to 
his expectations in others.
For Ken Spiering I share the gratitude of a 
good friend that goes well beyond friendship. 
What we would come to share over the years 
started with an introductory bag lunch and stroll 
in Spokane’s Riverfront Park. I was in awe of this 
well-recognized painter, sculptor. As we walked 
and talked our enjoyment with learning from 
each other became obvious. An awareness, and 
slowly an understanding, of the artist’s eye is what 
I found in Ken. Ken, whose admission surprised 
xxii
me, talked of his understanding of sculptural 
form but not at the scale of a landscape. Since that 
day, that varied scale of art, form, character, and 
message content has filled numerous coffee shop 
discussions, our creative process with Providence 
Sacred Heart Hospital’s healing garden, and most 
recently discussions regarding the cover graphic 
of Landscape Architecture as Storytelling. I look 
forward to more coffee shop discussions wondering where they will take us. Thank you Ken.
I owe a debt of gratitude to those designers 
through history who produced clearly legible 
environments that excited and comforted people. 
I owe the same debt of gratitude to those who 
didn’t. Both provided me with learning moments 
regarding people’s living with the products which 
designers provide. In generating questions in me 
about people-landscape interactions I was able to 
introduce my students to discussions that piqued 
their curiosity.
To the many many students I interacted with 
over 40 years, thank you for your excitement, your 
challenges, and your creativity. Thank you for the 
questions I never thought to ask. You helped form 
me not only as a person and a designer but also as 
an educator. You helped me develop an approach 
to learning I am now helping to grow in an alternative high school in Spokane, Washington. That 
approach is summed up by Lisa Mattson, the 
Principal of On Track Academy, as a school without 
walls where the community is the classroom.
Much appreciation to Lisa Drost, great 
friend and informal editor, Deb Finck, intellectual and compassionate explorer, and Cristina 
Olsen, editor of an early version of Landscape as 
Storytelling. I undoubtedly failed to recognize a 
number of people who influenced my thinking 
and practices as an educator and designer. For 
that I apologize. Please know I wouldn’t be the 
person or designer I am without your input.
And finally, Kate Schell, Senior Editor, 
Planning, Landscape, and Urban Design at 
Routledge and my Editorial Assistant (and publishing Guardian Angel) Megha Patel in Planning, 
Landscape, and Urban Design at Routledge/
Taylor & Francis Group. Thank you for believing 
in an idea that started taking shape in 1986.
Thank you Terri Scott for, in no uncertain 
terms in 2019, telling me to get off my butt and 
finish the book.
Introduction
I
nteresting how my life journey had me cross 
paths with so many thinkers who saw the connections between language and landscape. They 
were like farmers sowing seeds, ideas, that would 
germinate, take root, grow, and cause me to learn 
so much about my profession. As Thoreau notes, 
this learning doesn’t take place over night. “If a 
man is rich and strong anywhere it must be on 
his native soil. Here I have been these forty years 
of learning the language of these fields that I may 
better express myself” (Thoreau, 1973, xvi).
In learning how to see more clearly, I learned 
how to express myself more clearly. Loren Eiseley 
(1957; 1978), probably my favorite environmental observer and teacher, time and again helped 
me refine what I saw and how I thought about 
it. Eiseley also helped me realize I didn’t have to 
pigeonhole myself, I didn’t have to nail down who 
or what kind of landscape architect I was. 
Some men are daylight readers, 
who pursue the ambiguous 
wording of clouds or the 
individual letter shapes of 
wandering birds. Some, 
like myself, are librarians of 
the night, whose ephemeral 
documents consist of rootinscribed bones or whatever 
rustles in thickets upon solitary 
walks.
(Eiseley, 1978, 26)
While Thoreau and Eiseley directed me in seeing 
details in the world around me, John McPhee 
made me realize the extent to which landscapes 
express themselves and how, as I developed 
designs, I could use their narrative capabilities. 
“Rocks are records of events that took place at the 
time they formed. They are books. They have a 
different vocabulary, a different alphabet, but you 
learn how to read them” (McPhee, 2000, 164).
Landscape-as-text, designer-as-author, and 
user-as-reader comprise the fundamental premise 
of a three-tiered analogy that interrelates language, basic design, and landscape design (see 
Figure  0b.1). From this premise The Analogy 
opens us to ways to understand landscape design 
as processes of production, use, and the sequential, additive experiences of dwelling and place 
making. The Analogy’s approach to learning 
design through an understanding of the production of environments for others rests on how most 
of us learned to communicate through speech, 
reading, writing, and particularly the application of those media to storytelling. By relating to 
what most of us have as a general knowledge of 
the building and communication of narratives, 
the all too often unfamiliar world of design language and thinking is explored here from a familiar 
and comfortable starting point. The following ten 
chapters explore reading and writing, basic design, 
and landscape design as each informs the other and 
each relates to the social production of space and the 
responsibilities of those who take on the responsibility of designing such spaces. While The Analogy is 
directed at landscape architectural design, it is easily 
applied to interior design, architecture, urban design, 
and, to an extent, land planning. That broader 
application of The Analogy to include the other 
professions is why you’ll find I often refer to environmental design rather than just landscape architecture, although you must allow me a few digressions 
into my own profession and professional ego in my 
frequent references to landscape architecture.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-1
3
4
From the stage to the city is more 
of a leap in scale than symbolism. 
Built environment has the 
capacity to transmit messages 
which range from the conceptual 
and verbal to the abstract and 
inchoate. These intimations 
do not consist of objective 
information but rather reflect 
an internal mental assembly of 
symbols and images. The message 
can be ‘read’ and understood 
because the mind is versed in the 
language.
(Smith, 1977, 16)
Chapter 1 introduces the three-tiered analogy 
as a stepping-stone process to learning landscape 
architectural design. The Analogy is fundamentally an approach to doing design that sees the 
designer-as-author, the landscape-as-text, and the 
participant user-as-reader.
My arrival at what I came to call The Analogy, 
then the years of peeling back the layers of potential embodied in The Analogy was stimulated by 
three needs. First, my personal need to know a 
design process that made sense and could be 
replicated with equally good results each time. 
Second, my need to be able to communicate that 
understanding in an equally sensible and articulate manner. And third, my need to be able to 
interpret that understanding into learning experiences for my students. Students can be tricky. 
In my very first studio class, on my very first day 
of teaching I talked about “space” only to realize 
three of the students thought I was talking about 
outer space, not spaces in the landscape. From 
that moment on, communicating well was of paramount importance to me and likely set the stage 
for Landscape Architecture as Storytelling: Learning 
Design Through Analogy.
Why was learning design so confusing? My 
students helped me realize that the confusion 
rested in instructors and then students mixing 
the language, logic, and methods of three areas 
(or domains) of knowledge: the physical world 
of things and the physical sciences, the social 
world of people and the social sciences, and the 
expressive world of arts and aesthetics. Our somewhat sloppy way of thinking and expressing our 
thoughts is quite common. Start to closely read 
and listen to the news; often the human body 
or an ecological issue is discussed in terms of 
mechanics and machines. The idea that goes with 
Figure 0b.1 Three-tiered analogy interrelating language, basic design, and landscape design.
5
that outlook is that “It can be tinkered with and 
fixed. Hey, it’s a machine.”
That confusion, as we come to explore it here, 
is compounded by the fact that so much of design 
is based on assumptions. When an instructor and 
a student (or client) discuss a design, both assume 
a mutually agreed upon understanding of what 
is being discussed. Both, to an extent, assume 
a mutually agreed upon understanding of the 
terminology being used. And they both assume 
they see and agree upon what is contained in the 
designs’ images, when so often no such agreement 
exists. Now imagine that multiplied by a studio 
full of students each with his or her own assumptions.
The three-tiered analogy presented in Chapter 
1 is the foundation upon which the subsequent 
chapters continue to clarify how design may 
be expressed in ways that provide for mutually 
agreed upon understandings. While Chapter 1 
provides a background rationale for The Analogy, 
Chapter 2 introduces a typology along with rules 
that guide the application of the typology’s building blocks in the formulation of landscape texts. 
Our alphabet, combined in ways that become 
words, provides the first tier of the three-tiered 
analogy. Understanding the typology’s second 
and third tiers, of basic design and landscape 
design respectively (Figure 0b.1), rest on and are 
derived from the language tier. Language is the 
medium applied, through rules such as grammar 
and syntax, to basic design principles and eventually to the authoring of landscape narratives 
which express themselves on three interrelated 
levels of interpretation: practical, socio-cultural, 
and deeply rooted archetypes or visceral meanings 
held by all humans.
What we will find is that even more interesting 
than picking apart the three-tiered analogy is the 
opportunity to apply the typology to the development of a landscape narrative as a particular story 
set in a particular place and guided by a particular theme. Storytelling, as a form of narrative, is 
sequential and additive. Words become sentences, 
sentences become paragraphs, and paragraphs 
become a story.
The idea of story, or narrative, helps us understand the role of basic design and then landscape 
design in a landscape participant’s emerging experiences. The reader of landscapes like the reader of 
books gradually identifies a theme and then the 
character and content of the story or place. They 
acquire their first impression. As they continue 
along their route of travel, let’s say as they walk 
into a calming environment of poetic sensations, 
or into an edgy, mysterious place of anticipation, 
they pick up on the character and content of those 
landscape settings by reading their surroundings. 
So, you begin to see how the sequential character 
of reading, word after word, is a lot like what you 
do as you are walking, bicycling, or driving a car 
or, for that matter, water skiing, rock climbing, or 
running a marathon. Our activities are primarily 
linear in nature, moving through space and time. 
Moment by moment you acquire more and more 
information. This movement, or what designers usually refer to as “circulation,” is key to a 
designer authoring the dialectic between user and 
the objects and spaces making up their landscape.
Another benefit to using language as the basis 
of The Analogy is how its parts (letters of the 
alphabet give rise to words, words give rise to 
sentences, and so on) and its structure (a theme 
responding to the rules of grammar and syntax) 
can be related to the parts and principles of basic 
design and landscape architectural design. With 
this understanding The Analogy introduces the 
building blocks of the landscape-as-text metaphor.
Vol-ume, noun
1. A book forming a part of a 
work or series;
2. The amount of space that 
a substance or object occupies, 
or that is enclosed within a 
container especially when great.
(Oxford Languages https://
languages.oup.com/googledictionary-en/)
Derived from Tier I, grammar and syntax 
guide our understanding of the rules that give 
6
basic design (Wong, 1972) and landscape design 
(Simonds, 1961; 2006) their identifiable forms 
and respective character and content. The building blocks of language are readily seen in the 
related building blocks of basic design and then 
in landscape design. Simply put, a word is like 
a point, a sentence is like a line, and paragraphs 
are like two-dimensional planes that give rise to 
books (stories) as three-dimensional volumes. 
Catch the double meaning?
To guide our understanding of The Analogy’s 
typology, the word-point-object metaphor as part 
of the language-basic design-landscape design 
metaphor is introduced in Chapter 2, Typology. 
Like a point in basic design, an individual spoken 
or written word in order to express a meaningful 
message requires a context or setting in which it 
is located. To move from a collection of individual messages to that continuum we call narrative 
calls for the planned, sequential organization of 
the other building blocks to develop a continuity 
across a site. As designers, once we come to know 
the probable users of our design, the reasons that 
bring them to our design, and how they likely 
expect to interact with the landscape, we can 
begin to massage the typology’s building blocks 
so they gain a cohesive and contextual character 
that provides for the sequencing of messages that 
make sense under a given theme.
In her description of the Room 
in Context, Katherine Benzel 
notes that while an individual 
room “can be seen and ‘read’ 
apart from its context…this 
visual reading makes the interior 
room appear removed from 
reality.” She goes on to say that 
“we are able to see and read a 
word alone without its context, 
but what counts is the meaning 
a particular word has in the 
structure of the work through its 
use in relation to the surrounding 
words. Surrounding words 
joined together in patterns of 
construction support and unfold 
the meaning of a text”.
(Benzel, 1998, 15–16)
Consider coming upon a small, public courtyard. You see it about 50–60 yards up ahead and 
readily identify it as a public space. The objects 
defining the approach and entryway, the objects’ 
placement, and their organization tell you this is 
a place where you can relax if you chose. In that 
you identified a courtyard, you then consider the 
sequential expressions of a narrative that speak to 
your courtyard-related expectations. This is no 
minor thing. Focusing on a courtyard theme calls 
into play courtyard-related shapes, spaces, activity 
settings, and not those of any number of other 
non-courtyard activity settings: softball, fishing 
pier, outdoor BBQ.
Now let’s say what you identified as a public 
courtyard is located in a part of Boston, near the 
base of historic Beacon Hill. Or, maybe in a more 
modern setting, e.g., Dubai’s artificially produced 
Palm Island, Palm Jumeirah. Draped in their 
respective social and cultural histories, personal 
biographies, and aesthetic appreciations the physical, structuring, aspects of each narrative readily 
bring into play   a uniquely distinctive, yet culturFigure 0b.2 1890 Acorn Street, Beacon Hill  
Boston, MA. Courtesy of Historic New England.
7
ally coherent character to each environment. As we 
spend time in one or the other location, the place 
becomes meaning-full. Through time, we come to 
identify with and find meaning in the place’s features and activities. Through our repetitive use, the 
character of the place comes to provide us with 
a sense of being in a place, or being oriented in 
time and in our respective lives (Norberg-Schulz, 
1980; 1985). As we look at transforming spaces 
into places, objects become so much more than 
mere things to be moved around. They take on 
a purpose. One-, two-, and three-dimensional 
objects convey practical messages: “come here,” 
“go around,” or “look at me.” Or as adjectives and 
adverbs they enhance or modify the character of 
the fundamental messages: “come here slowly,” 
“stay and enjoy the aroma and color,” “enjoy 
going over there and being happy.”
Unpacking The Analogy’s typology as it interrelates language, basic design, and landscape 
design begins in Chapter 2 with the letter-of-the- 
alphabet, basic-design-point, and object-in-thelandscape analogy. This cross-characterization 
of word-point-landscape object helps us understand the expressive qualities of landscape places, 
spaces, and things. With that understanding 
we begin to see how each tier’s introduction of 
guidelines (syntax/grammar, basic design principles, and landscape design concepts) structures 
individual messages into developmentally coherent sequences that evolve into a complete narrative. In this way design, like storytelling, evolves 
into a thematically driven sequence of thematically related messages, and not into a haphazard, 
hodgepodge of expressions.
Chapter 2 gets us thinking about built designs 
as more than physical environments into which 
we enter and carry out certain behaviors. Through 
the typology we begin to see designed and constructed spaces as interactive expressions, as a dialectic between a physical environment made up of 
messages and its participant readers. In vertically 
interrelating each portion of The Analogy, making 
connections between tiers (Figure 0b.5), we begin 
to explore the parts of each tier as they inform 
and form each other. A more detailed exploration 
of the typology starts in Chapter 3 with words as 
basic design points and objects in the landscape. 
That beginning is expanded in Chapter 4, Lines; 
Chapter 5, Planes; and finally Chapter 6, Volumes 
and Volumetric Spaces.
For an example of a word-point-object analogy 
(Figure 0b.6), take a blank piece of paper, or 
computer screen. Look at it. What do your eyes 
do? They wander, they roam. There is nothing to 
settle on. Place a single letter of the alphabet or 
single word anywhere on the empty space and 
all sorts of wonderful things begin to happen. 
Suddenly there are aspects of here and there, me 
and it, a sense of orientation where previously 
there was none; the designer-as-author’s communication with the user-as-reader has begun along 
with a hint of the narrative’s theme and character. 
As the objects and their attributes become more 
meaning-full, we begin to recognize that they are 
as much a part of our purpose for being there as 
Figure 0b.3 2020 Acorn Street, Beacon Hill, 
Boston, MA. Item ID: 501710236. Courtesy Sean 
Pavone.
Figure 0b.4 The walk at JBR, Dubai Marina, 
Dubai. Courtesy, Fabio Achilli, Photographer 
(Sept. 3, 2013).
8
we are for their existence. Selected relative to a 
design’s intent and well placed across our field of 
vision, the collection of individual objects begins 
to meet our expectations. The designer has started 
off well.
What we typically consider as things in space 
or points in basic design, I like to think of as 
gatherers and conveyors of relationships: you-me, 
here-there, I-Thou, up-down, left-right. When we 
overlay the progression of a space’s messages with 
rules pertaining to grammar, syntax, and idiom, 
we are guided in the production of landscape 
narratives. In a similar fashion the production of 
two- and three-dimensional design is guided by 
related rules and principles (Wong, 1972; 1977) 
as is landscape architectural design (Alexander, 
1977; 1979; Church, 1983; Simonds, 1961; 
Treib, 1991). The fact that we move from point 
to point throughout any given day calls for those 
points to be connected with linear features such 
as paths, hallways, sidewalks, and roads. Chapter 
4 delves into these linear features and how they 
enable a coherent continuity across a narrative, 
basic design, and landscape.
In that initial act of placing (locating) a word 
(object) on a blank piece of paper, empty computer screen, or barren site, we initiate and introduce a degree of expectation in the yet to appear 
construct of letters and words that will follow. 
The linear construct of a line, a sentence, or path, 
or walkway is guided by the rules and normative 
practices associated with the media you are using –  
Figure 0b.6 Visualizing the three-tiered analogy.
Figure 0b.5 Analogy’s vertical relationships linking language, basic design, and landscape design.
9
writing, music, mathematics, oil painting – and 
the context or setting in which they are placed. 
An exploration of our ability to communicate 
through various media helps us recognize that our 
ability to produce landscape narratives involves 
both implicit and explicit material forms, such as 
letters of the alphabet that are explicit words or 
those that are not words but in how they sound 
imply words: b, be, bee; c, see, sea; t, tee, tea. 
Becoming a good designer also requires an ability 
to use pauses. Spaces in landscape design do as 
much to hold objects together as the objects do 
to define the spaces. Points of pause along a path 
or walkway allow us time to see where we are 
and where we are going – to become reoriented. 
Points of pause allow us to take a breather before 
continuing along a line to the next point.
Before getting into the narrative contained in 
or brought to a landscape through an authoring 
(design) process we explore a message’s coherent 
development across space: its continuity across 
messages. You have probably begun to realize 
that the development of a landscape architectural 
design is not a willy-nilly process of randomly 
selecting objects, their materials and the materials’ finishes, their placement, and the spaces 
they define because you like them. Chapter 4 
addresses bringing together words to make sentences as coherent strings of message segments 
or statements. In basic design, as a point moves 
through space it inscribes a line. In a landscape 
a line connects points. Speaking or writing a 
sentence is not a process of random word selection. That would be gibberish. The selection of a 
word as the subject of a sentence calls into play 
a selection process that simultaneously identifies and limits the words from which you can 
select subsequent words. To introduce boating, 
sailing, or marina design immediately eliminates 
words and phrases associated with urban plazas 
and parks, tennis courts, or elementary schools. 
Similarly, selecting a point or landscape feature 
of a particular visual character asks that it be 
followed in a basic design by lines that reflect 
that character. In a landscape a linear feature 
typically builds upon the character of the point 
from which it started or eventually ends. There 
is a continuity between the points and the lines 
and their surroundings, those areas to which the 
linear features begin to give shape.
Planes, the subject of Chapter 5, explore the 
relationships between sentences as they become 
paragraphs, lines as they become planes, and linear 
landscape features making up what we know as 
ground planes, vertical planes or walls, and overhead planes as ceiling or sky. Metaphorically, in 
much the same way as lines move through space 
to inscribe a plane, sentences multiply across a 
page to become paragraphs, which are also two 
dimensional. In landscapes such two-dimensional 
message delivery features do as much to express 
statements as direct the sequential arrangement of 
those statements which people read in their surroundings. Much of our understanding of how 
these features are organized to provide for coherent stories is drawn from a blend of oral history 
(Rubin, 1995), the social production of space 
(Giddens, 1984; Lefebvre, 1994), and the deeper 
meanings and beliefs that bind people as a culture 
(Campbell, 1974; Marx, 1981; Rapoport, 1982).
A portion of Chapter 5 is given to making clear 
distinctions too often ignored by designers. Planes 
are two-dimensional areas. Yet often architects, 
landscape architects, and interior designers speak 
of them as being three dimensional. With years of 
training and more years of practice, designers look 
at a two-dimensional plan of an interior, an architectural structure, and a landscape and in their 
mind’s eye see three-dimensional environments. 
All too often the assumption is that their clients 
have the same ability, which, more often than 
not, they don’t. The confusion is further complicated by two factors. One factor is when an 
architectural or landscape ground plane or floor 
plan includes changes in elevation, a problem not 
an issue in the two-dimensional representations 
in basic designs and paintings. The other factor 
is that all too often to understand landscape, 
architectural, and interior plans designers unconsciously consider movement (Aminzadeh et al., 
2016; Bacon, 1974). The fourth dimension of 
time is introduced but again not often discussed 
to where it is mutually understood and agreed 
upon. However, an excellent exploration of time 
and movement as factors in a designed sequence of 
views along a pathway is provided by Aminzadeh 
10
et al.’s application of scenario writing as the “relationship between time-related experiences while 
moving through a landscape and the structure of 
scenario making in cinema and dramatic narratives” (Aminzadeh et al., 2016, 175). Throughout 
Chapter 5 these implicit and explicit qualities are 
looked at in literature, basic design and paintings, 
and environmental design. As the three primary 
planes – ground planes, vertical planes, and 
­overhead planes – are brought together, the idea 
of volumes or spatial rooms begins to take shape.
Chapter 6 expands the development of basic 
design planes in their coming together as three-­
dimensional volumes. In language our sentences 
produce paragraphs. As paragraphs evolve from 
one to the next and the next again they become a 
book or a volume. Landscape painters use ground 
planes, vertical planes, and overhead planes to 
develop visual places or sequences of places as 
landscape rooms (Conron, 2000, 92–102). In 
landscape designs such rooms are designed to 
accommodate activities and direct people’s movement from one room to the next. This movement 
throughout a narrative from place to place brings 
with it two realizations. First, planes are employed 
to develop spaces, more precisely volumetric 
spaces. Second, the volumetric spaces in a planned 
or authored sequence give us a foreground, middle 
ground, and background progression. To better 
understand these relationships, Chapter 6 deals 
with ground planes, vertical planes, and overhead planes separately and in detail. As they come 
together we begin to consider the role of movement in people’s experiences. Our movement 
from where we were to where we are and then to 
where we are going traveling through a planned 
design sequence is what Cullen calls serial vision 
(Cullen, 1961, 17). Bacon calls it an unfolding or 
a sequence of sensations (Bacon, 1974, 53–57). 
Whether serial vision or an unfolding, we have 
the culmination of our piecing together of The 
Analogy’s typology and the beginning of its application to the designing of landscapes and authoring of landscape narratives.
As a preface to our delving into landscape as 
narrative, Chapter 7 opens on a cautionary note. 
In the areas of art history and philosophy of art 
there exists a lot of information regarding narrative in general and landscape narrative in particular. However, many of the studies on people 
reading their environments ignore the existence 
of landscape all together. Architecture dominates. Fortunately, at a more pedestrian level we 
find analyses of narrative message content in the 
ever-­changing dynamics of the Mississippi River 
(Twain, 1984); in homes, neighborhoods, and 
urban ­districts (Alexander, 1977; 1979); in the 
philosophical musings on Paris and the Eiffel Tower 
(Barthes, 1982); and in the Alps and Grecian landscapes (Durrell, 1969; Lawrence, 2007).
Chapter 7 draws on The Analogy to start with 
the smallest part of the language metaphor and 
build up through words to sentences, to paragraphs, and finally to full narratives. How The 
Analogy’s parts are applied to the authoring of a 
landscape narrative moves from the smallest characteristics of the objects and spaces used up to the 
larger qualities that enable people to identify what 
a landscape is expressing. The smaller message 
mediums are the materials which combine to 
make landscape objects, the surface finishes given 
those objects, and the kinds of plants used. From 
materials’ qualities a narrative grows in the story it 
is telling through the objects selected, their shapes 
and forms, and the spaces they define. Finally, the 
sequential, additive nature of the spaces allows 
us to comprehend the unfolding of volumetric 
spaces through a site that calls our attention to the 
narrative’s introduction, body, and conclusion.
The sequential aspect of a narrative as it winds 
its way across a site brings an additive quality 
to the messages. One message is added to by a 
second one and so on. What those messages are 
and how they are perceived though an orchestration of our five senses are explored with the 
help of such literary pieces as Jewett’s Country 
of the Pointed (1956) and Poe’s The Pit and the 
Pendulum (1904). There are three levels to the 
messages conveyed by a landscape narrative. First 
is the practical, “Can I get there from here? Will 
I be safe?” Second are the aspects of place and 
heritage: Colonial New England versus Art Deco 
Miami versus the Romanesque as found throughout Europe. The third level is that of archetypes or 
what Carl Jung called our collective unconscious: 
Hero, Trickster, Guardian.
11
The component parts of narrative are explored 
in the latter part of Chapter 7 through a balanced approach between the more philosophical and literary fundamentals of landscape and 
the everyday aspects of Philadelphia’s Mill Creek 
neighborhood (Spirn, 1998) and Wood and 
Beck’s analysis of the social etiquette two parents 
work to teach their kids regarding their living 
room and front porch (1994). In reviewing the 
meaning context of the Mill Creek neighborhood and a residential living room, we deal with 
the place making and meaning content of places 
we have all encountered. In doing so we are able 
to step back and look at not just what the narrative contents are but how they came about and 
are perpetuated. Chapter 7 gathers together the 
component parts of landscape as narrative and 
brings us to where we are prepared to apply 
those parts in a three-step process to author/
design a landscape narrative.
The narrative-storyboard-design process in 
Chapters 8 and 9 is introduced by much of what 
Kevin Lynch outlines as an approach to doing 
design. Lynch’s thinking is clarified as you draft 
your narrative and discuss it with your peers. 
Further clarification occurs during discussions 
over how well the narrative and the storyboard 
complement each other. Authoring your landscape narrative starts with your understanding of 
who the probable users of your design are, their 
values, their reasons for coming to and being in 
your design, and their expectations. With that, 
your eventual landscape narrative is built upon 
people’s experiences. The spaces, places, and 
things that make up your design follow naturally 
but are secondary. In doing so, Lynch’s “three fundamental patterns of location in space and time –  
the pattern of activity, the pattern of circulation, 
and the physical forms” (Lynch, 1971, 246, 277) –  
are given their needed consideration from the 
beginning of your design process. In that authoring a landscape narrative focuses on people’s experiences, not objects and spaces, the design process 
from its inception avoids Lynch’s concern for 
designers separating out individual “aspects,” as 
he calls them, that could “lead to the neglect of 
larger relations” and “cause serious difficulties if 
maintained as a complete design process” (277).
Chapter 8, Authoring a Landscape Narrative, 
explores the expressive content imbedded in and 
related to landscape narratives. Supported by the 
works of designers (Church, 1983; Halprin and 
Burns, 1974; Lynch, 1972), geographers (Barthes, 
1982; Relph, 1987; Tuan, 1978; Williams, 1973; 
1983), anthropologists (Rapoport, 1969; 1982), 
sociologists (Larson, 1977; Wolff, 1981), and 
critical theorists (Giddens, 1984; Habermas, 
1979), three levels of message content are seen to 
exist in built and natural forms. The first level, 
that of functional messaging, is the most explicit 
and immediate to daily life. Functional messages 
support our ongoing concern for personal safety 
and comfort: “Can I get there from here?” “How 
exposed will I be?” “Can I find my way back?” 
The second level of expression relates to aspects 
of social culture and heritage that allow us to 
maintain a sense of orientation in regard to who 
and where we are. These narratives of period and 
place, or space and time, are more subtle than 
those of personal safety and comfort, and yet 
longer lasting in their binding a people with a 
place’s history with the present and the future. 
The third level of narrative is the most subtle and 
yet the most enduring and long lasting. These are 
the expressions of deep symbolism, deeply rooted 
values found in what Jung calls the collective 
unconscious (Stors, 1983). The collective unconscious “is a term coined by psychoanalyst Carl 
Jung and refers to the unconscious mind shared 
by all of humanity. It is composed of archetypes, 
which are simple [yet very powerful] representations of universal figures and relationships” 
(GoodTheraphy, 2019). “While common to all 
mankind…each person experiences them his own 
way” (Stevens, 1982, 39). If the Jungian concept 
is a little too unconventional for some of you, 
then consider the deep emotional convictions 
inspired by national and religious symbols, or cultural beliefs such as “la familia” the family or clan, 
nationalism, or religion. Chapter 8 explores these 
levels of communication in terms of the kinds of 
messages they express: function; socio-cultural 
heritage; and visceral, heart-pounding archetypes 
in the unconscious.
Combining statements into coherent message 
sequences moves the concept of landscape-as-text 
12
into the realm of landscape-as-narrative. Statements 
are singular expressions. “Stop.” “Stop now.” “Have 
a seat.” “Look to your left.” These individual statements lack context, purpose, anticipated outcome. 
They are situated and likely stationary in that as 
individual expressions they are tied to particular 
objects and spaces. But this is not how we exist and 
live in our environments. Our movement through 
an environment is not a collection of disconnected, 
separate moments. We do not beam in and beam 
out of locations along a walkway or road. On the 
contrary, our reading of a narrative is a developmental continuum made up of transitions across 
space and time, whether that space and time is a 
page or painting or a landscape.
With the help of a case study, you are introduced to students’ responses to a request to design 
a healing garden for Providence Sacred Heart 
Hospital in Spokane, Washington, then asked 
to author a short narrative of your own. Once 
reviewed with friends or work cohorts, the students then interpreted their narratives into storyboards, which itself was then critiqued by peers 
and interpreted into a final design. Through this 
study you will see that the process was dialectical, 
each phase improved through interaction with the 
others as the narrative was reflected off the storyboard and further refined when the storyboard 
was reflected off the developing final design.
We prepare landscape designs for people not 
objects. Specifically, we are told by John Simonds, 
we design for people’s experiences. To that I add 
that we design for people’s anticipated experiences. 
In Chapter 8, with the help of three authors, 
fiction writer Colleen Mariah Rae (1996), poet 
Ted Kooser (2005), and novelist and non-fiction 
writer Anne Lamott (1994), we are provided 
somewhat differing approaches to writing. Their 
own experiences as authors, and not always good 
experiences, help us become less anxious about 
writing a first- or second-person narrative. The 
narrative you will be asked to write can be for a 
healing garden in a hospital complex or a project 
of your choosing. The idea is to experience firsthand what you are reading about: authoring a 
short narrative, turning it into a storyboard, and 
then interpreting your storyboard into a landscape architectural design.
I ask you to write a first- or second-person narrative because they express people’s experiences, 
the happiness of finding what they anticipated, of 
being surprised, and sometime not finding what 
they anticipated and of being disappointed. You are 
not asked to write a third-person narrative because 
third-person narratives tend to be descriptive of 
places and settings. Descriptive narratives like 
much of what is typically practiced as landscape 
architectural design leave people’s experiences to 
be assumed. A designer can describe a person’s 
walk to a seat and the person sitting down. With 
that the designer and the client are left to assume 
the person’s experiences. The existence of a mutually agreed upon understanding of the person’s 
experiences, their sequential experiences, remains 
assumed. The narrative-storyboard-­design process 
helps avoid that from happening.
Chapter 8 speaks to minimizing designer-­
client assumptions by exploring two benefits 
that come with writing a first- or second-person 
narrative text. First, the linear sequential nature 
of a narrative easily echoes the linear sequential 
nature of someone walking, driving, cross country 
skiing, bicycling, pushing a carriage toward, into, 
and through a designed landscape. Second, we 
are allowed to author and then review the additive sequential nature of people’s senses gathering 
information from near and far. At a given point 
visual sights may dominate while sounds and 
aromas remain in the background yet supportive of the primary messages. A few steps further 
and the primary visual scene becomes secondary 
to what are now dominant sounds and aromas. 
Narrating what your landscape participant users 
experience through their senses is much like an 
orchestration. The basses come forward while 
the wind instruments remain in the background. 
Later the strings take stage front supported by a 
background of basses, winds, and percussion.
I imagine many designers look at writers in 
much the same way many writers look at designers. “How do they do that?” Hard work. Stick-toitiveness. Perseverance. Fiction writer Rae (1996) 
and poet Kooser (2005) help us understand 
writing as a mostly fun creative endeavor. The key 
approach to writing, the one I most enjoy sharing 
with others, is non-fiction writer Lamott’s “Shitty 
13
First Drafts” (1994). While Rae and Kooser deal 
with the repetitive nature of writing, the time 
commitment, and the refining of sentences and 
flow of thoughts, Lamott speaks to what those of 
us afraid of writing easily understand: just get it 
down on paper. It may be a mess, but no one will 
see it.
Most interesting is that being a designer is 
much like being a writer. Chapter 8 helps you 
become less anxious about writing through examples of other’s early drafts of narratives. Given 
even the simplest narrative drafts, much like the 
stick figures famous film directors used to sketch 
up simple storyboards, reworking your narrative 
through discussions with cohorts brings them 
more and more to life. Shitty first drafts eventually become wonderful landscape designs.
A major benefit to producing a storyboard, as 
found in Chapter 9, is how closely related it is to 
a written narrative. A storyboard is the visualization of a written narrative and as such provides a 
smooth progression from landscape users’ experiences to a designed landscape-as-narrative. Both 
text and storyboard are linear, sequential mediums 
that help replicate the movement of participants 
in a landscape. What you find is that reflecting 
one off the other, especially in discussions with 
staff, classmates, or friends, quickly illuminates 
gaps in the flow of your landscape participant’s 
experiences and the environment through which 
he or she is moving.
Refining the characteristics of objects and 
spaces in your storyboard that come to make 
up your design brings up the question of “How 
do I know a particular combination of objects, 
materials, and finishes will in fact contribute to someone having the experience(s) being 
called for?” Chapter 9 provides an exercise, an 
Emotional Matrix, that as you fill it out answers 
that question. Working through the Emotional 
Matrix carries you step by step to those sensual 
criteria that will most likely allow you to identify 
the objects that will make up your final design.  
Filling out the matrix is an exercise in self-­reflection. 
You come to realize, almost simultaneously 
realize, how much you know but take for granted 
regarding the environments making up your daily 
routines, and the similarities across built environments that contribute to the experiences you and 
others encounter.
As an intermediate presentation to your client(s), the narrative-storyboard-final design 
process is a powerful tool. Its power is in the fact 
that it is personal. First- and second-person narratives captured in storyboard visuals are quickly 
and easily identified with by clients and potential 
built design’s participants. Assumptions regarding what your final design contributes to as the 
­participant-users’ experiences are minimized. 
There are three other benefits to this process. 
First, your presentations are through the eyes 
and sensual experiences of those who will come 
to enjoy your design. Second, you easily avoid 
describing your design through the language of 
geometry and design jargon, an approach that 
relies on assumptions often never shared with 
clients. And third is that since your whole design 
process is, in a sense, derived from people experiencing your design there is no reason to use 
such statements as “I decided.” “I wanted.” “I put 
this here.” Such statements are common in many 
architectural, landscape architectural, and interior 
design presentations. Clients and public attendees’ natural responses to such statements are questions commonly directed at you: “Why did you 
do this or that?” The narrative-storyboard-design 
approach gets questions, but they are focused on 
the design participants’ experiences, with which 
your audience often readily identifies.
Ethics in Landscape Architectural Design 
Practice, the focus of Chapter 10, may at first 
seem a strange concluding chapter to a book on 
doing designs that give shape, form, and character 
to the lifeworlds of others. Actually, Chapter 10’s 
introduction of the ethical responsibility of landscape architectural designers for those for whom 
they design is a logical conclusion to Landscape 
Architecture as Storytelling. Almost nothing exists 
in the education, certification, and professionalization of landscape architects that speaks to their 
responsibilities to those left to live with what they 
design. The landscape users as participants in the 
design are mentioned but rarely in terms of their 
sequential experiences. Chapter 10 argues for an 
understanding of design as an outgrowth of the 
personal and social contexts in which designs are 
14
placed. A summary of the socialization of design 
professionals illuminates the growing separation of designers from their clientele, the greater 
public, and the places in which that public resides. 
The contemporary existence of this separation is 
further supported by the education and works 
of planners, landscape architects, and architects 
(Scarfo, 1988; 1989).
Chapter 10 explores designers’ ethical responsibility to meet the expectations that comprise 
people’s daily routines as those activities help 
sustain a place and its resources. A close look into 
what constitutes design practice highlights a discontinuity between doing design for the sake of 
doing design and doing design for the sake of its 
expressive content as narratives. This final look at 
design deals with professional ethics in terms of 
designers’ responsibilities to people and their live, 
work, play, and learning environments. Chapter 
10 asks the question, if designs do not at least 
meet people’s experiential expectations, or exceed 
them, are we being ethically responsible as the 
designers of other’s worlds?
Our responsibilities to those we serve are 
grounded in the reading and writing of landscape 
narratives, of spatial texts. That approach brings 
designers “down to earth,” to the eye-level sequential interpretative realm of their proposed designs’ 
eventual users. By narrating people’s eye-level 
experiences, the designer avoids getting personally 
removed from a proposed design’s activity areas 
and people’s experiences as happens when they 
use geometric, technical, and financial jargon. An 
eye-level interpretation of landscapes helps avoid 
a trap many land planners fall into regarding land 
use. For land planners, yellow on all land-use 
maps denotes single-family residential usage. But 
the eye-level sense of character and of place varies 
if the “yellow” land use is applied to a 200-yearold village or a new community. Language, and 
later language-as-narrative, helps us understand 
and apply that knowledge of a place’s eye-level 
character to landscape, architectural, and interior 
designs, to the cultural surroundings and subjectivities of everyday life.
With this kind of thinking a look into the 
content of the American Society of Landscape 
Architects’ Code of Professional Ethics brings out 
the fact that little attention is given to those individuals left to live with our designs. A further review 
of the American Society of Landscape Architects’ 
Constitution and Bylaws brings to light a similar 
finding (Vernon, 1987). Throughout most of the 
profession’s rules of conduct, academic accreditation, and professional licensure the responsibility 
of professional landscape architects to people is 
an underlying assumption. The existence of such 
assumptions is considered in Chapter 10.
While the idea of landscape-as-narrative is not 
new to landscape architects (Alon-Mozes, 2006; 
Potteiger and Purinton, 1998; Spirn, 1984; 1998), 
or for that matter architects (Benzel, 1998; Smith, 
1977), interior designers (Benzel, 1998), and 
geographers (Light and Smith, 2005), the application of a design’s users’ experiences as a narrative 
to the teaching, learning, and practicing of design 
is. An excellent collection of papers on landscape 
as narrative, published between 1995 and 1998, 
is found in Landscape Review published out of 
Lincoln University in Canterbury, New Zealand. 
The papers predominantly deal with landscape 
messages as singular statements in separate locations throughout a site and not as narratives across 
a site (Swaffield, 1995; 1996). Benzel (1998) and 
Bacon (1974), while not explicitly recognizing 
the narrative content of spaces, do recognize that 
life in, through, and between spaces is a continuum or, as social geographers would say, a state 
of becoming. From a design perspective, I tend 
to think of it as an ongoing state of transition; 
step by step we constantly transition from one 
moment to the next, from one experience to the 
next. Benzel’s expanded understanding of interior 
design recognizes the interrelatedness of contexts 
along a continuum. She recognizes that a room is 
only understood when we know it “as inseparable 
from its environment and, once removed, cannot 
be seen either in the round or as a pattern within 
the whole” (1998, 15). In basing his Design of 
Cities (1974) on paths and pathway systems, 
Edmond Bacon provides one of the better introductions to people reading their environments as 
a continuum. For Bacon, the fourth dimension’s 
interrelationship of space and time is critical to 
understanding a place. While each author’s perspective is in itself a valuable addition to the 
15
premise of designer-as-author, and user-as-reader, 
we still need to understand the greater cohesiveness and wholeness brought to people’s experiences of a place through narrative. An “authored” 
or designed continuum linking, to borrow from 
Benzel (1998), the city to the room through the 
neighborhood, landscape, and buildings, is what 
Landscape Architecture as Storytelling introduces to 
the practice of design based on the landscape-astext metaphor, or better landscape-as-narrative.
Over the years I noticed that students who use 
the landscape-as-text and landscape-as-narrative 
metaphors seem to more readily recognize the 
value of interrelationships between their landscape architectural and elective classes. Using 
a landscape narrative approach to developing 
a design provides a steppingstone in the use of 
metaphors to consider new knowledge, not as 
separate bits of information, but as contributing 
to an integrative and interdependent whole. As 
students gain more knowledge from classes other 
than design their world becomes broader, their 
narratives become clearer as does the content of 
the messages making up their environmental narratives. They become increasingly aware that the 
selection of specific materials and finishes needed 
to communicate particular messages requires not 
only knowledge of history, sociology, and art 
but also knowledge of proper construction techniques, growing mediums, spatial forms, exposure, and more. Site engineering, construction 
techniques, and plant identification and ecology 
all contribute to their understanding of landscape 
design vocabulary. This is what constitutes the 
admixture of art, science, and sociology that is 
landscape architecture.
As students acquire an understanding of design 
vocabulary and narrative form and content, the 
idea of “doing design” becomes more than just 
selecting objects because they look good at the 
moment or feel right. Knowing what objects “say” 
calls for a knowledge of the objects’ basic attributes and how those attributes relate to a landscape 
users’ cultural and historical backgrounds. With 
an awareness of the meanings associated with 
various design features, the designer-as-author 
moves beyond being a youngster who repeats 
words ad nauseam and toward an author who 
labors over the development of each word’s selection and meanings. People can speak words that 
express intent, but not write poetry. Designers can 
call for particular design features, but the organization and character of the resulting spaces may 
speak only to the designer (Sorvig, 1996, 3). In 
such instances when a project is completed the 
users quickly alter the signs and signals in an effort 
to make the messages in the text more readable to 
themselves, more identifiable with who they are. 
Again, here, consider the time you spend after 
visitors leave your dinner party rearranging your 
apartment or home, putting things back “into 
place.” When landscape users do not identify with 
a design, especially one that is part of their daily 
lives, they consciously or unconsciously work to 
change it to something that does speak to them, 
that reflects who they feel they are.
One other thing to be aware of as you read 
Landscape Architecture as Storytelling is that 
narrative is used throughout the book in two 
ways. First, narrative pertains to the narrative 
the designer-as-author writes as a short first- or 
­second-person narrative story which is then 
turned into a storyboard and then interpreted 
as a final design. It is in the storyboard and the 
final design that the second use of narrative, that 
of landscape-as-narrative, becomes evident in the 
site design process and final built product.
Finally, I have two hopes, first that designers’ acceptance and application of the narrative-­
storyboard-design approach generates sufficient 
discussion and research as to cause its foundation in  
people’s landscape experiences to be brought into 
the American Society of Landscape Architects’ 
Code of Professional Conduct. My second hope is 
that The Analogy is accepted into accredited landscape architecture design programs, and further 
explored in undergraduates’ senior projects, 
master theses, and doctoral dissertations. 
1
Three-Tiered Analogy
I
n 1859, Samuel Langhorne Clemens, at 23 
years old, earned his steamboat pilot’s license. 
While a terrific achievement, I’m more in awe 
of how Mark Twain wrote about his relationship 
with the river. Like Loren Eiseley, Twain brought 
life to the expressive character of the Missouri and 
Mississippi Rivers. He was not single minded. He 
intermixed the science of hydrology with the engineering mechanics of steam engines and the social 
curiosity of those who would become his readers 
in ways that only he could express how clearly the 
river spoke to him. Language is everything, if you 
can read it. Clemens could read it. 
The face of the water, in time, 
became a wonderful book – a 
book that was a dead language 
to the uneducated passenger, 
but which told its mind to me 
without reserve, delivering its 
most cherished secrets as clearly 
as if it uttered them with a 
voice. And it was not a book to 
be read once and thrown aside, 
for it had a new story to tell 
every day.
(Twain, 1984, 94)
RATIONALE BEHIND THE 
ANALOGY
I struggled as a landscape architecture student to 
transition from problem solving in the formula- 
driven worlds of science and mathematics to the 
subjective and seemingly ambiguous problem-­
solving world of design. In that struggle I found some  
clarity in three interrelated realms of knowledge: 
physical sciences, social sciences, and aesthetic 
expressions, or we could say science, society, and 
the arts. My desire to understand how, or even 
if, the three realms of knowledge are interrelated in 
the socialization of designers led me to realize that 
most of what is learned as design perpetuates two 
flaws in what many of us exercise as design process 
(Scarfo, 1989). First, design students tend to define 
and solve for social and aesthetic problems using 
technology. In doing so they focus on “how” a  
design is carried out or “how” people physically 
interact with a place independent of “why” it is 
designed the way it is and “why” it evokes the particular experiences it does. Second, when they do 
argue for social-psychological relevancy and aesthetic goodness they all too frequently do so from 
a position of personal opinion. Rarely do they 
define social contexts or explore local expression, 
a people’s place in history and their sense of orientation within their heritage. The acceptance of 
opinion over facts is a learned form of discourse 
(Scarfo, 1989). The distinction between the form 
Figure 1.1 Bowl and Pitcher, Riverside State 
Park, Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-2
17
18
and content of discourse, or how we say what we 
say, is explored more fully in Chapter 7.
Ignorance of the three realms of knowledge 
and their respective problem-solving strategies 
and production skills is not confined to designers but is found in most modern professions 
(Boyer and Mitgang, 1996; Forester, 1985; 
Larson, 1977). Many designers, like much 
of Western society, have yet to recognize that 
social problems cannot be solved with technical solutions. Neither can technical problems 
be solved with only personal appreciations or 
political strategies (read, without facts). With an 
introduction to and application of The Analogy 
design students come to inescapably recognize 
their proposed designs’ social and psychological contexts, their humanity. This recognition 
of what we could call the poetry of life occurs 
because design is approached through the eventual users’ view of the design, their reasons for 
being there, and their anticipated experiences.
The authoring of a design narrative, written as a 
first- or second-person narrative, causes a designer 
to be grounded in their design’s period, place, and 
people. Writing a narrative on behalf of a person 
living out the poetry of daily life excludes the use 
of abstract design jargon such as axis, focal point, 
and circulation system. By writing a narrative 
that expresses people’s experiences the separation 
from daily life found in abstract design language 
is replaced by a sequencing, or choreography, 
of human expectations, behaviors, and participation. The appropriate role of the three realms 
of knowledge – a designers’ efforts to determine 
“what” is to be expressed (the science and technology), “why” it is to be expressed (the sociology), and “how” it can be expressed (the arts) – as 
applied to the authoring of a landscape narrative 
is explained in more detail in Chapters 7 and 8.
Development of The Analogy grew out of my 
concern with what design students in general, and 
landscape architectural design students in particular, come to believe constitutes good design. 
Listen closely to what students say in their presentations, what they feel is important enough to 
be communicated about the goodness of their 
designs. Between September 1986 and Spring 
1987, I followed, interviewed, and recorded a 
cross-section of first- through fourth-year 
What are the sources of our 
environmental information? 
What happens when we 
substitute one kind of evidence 
for another? How do we supplant 
inadequate or erroneous views 
and stereotypes? ....[and what 
Figure 1.2 Three-tiered analogy interrelating language, basic design, and landscape design. Drawn 
by author.
19
happens when] second-hand 
data are superseded by firsthand experience, and the impact 
of this replacement process on 
exploratory decisions?
(Lowenthal & Bowden, 1976, 7)
University of Toronto landscape architecture students. That work was supplemented with a more 
limited study of University of Guelph and Rutgers 
University landscape architecture undergraduate 
students and faculty (Scarfo, 1989). That research 
provided over 100 hours of audio and video 
recordings. When reviewed, the oral and visual 
­student-student, student-faculty, and faculty-faculty interactions showed that all to too frequently 
the students’ language and reasoning was that of 
geometry and technology, how this or that was produced, what the final design product looked like 
in two-dimensional, plan-view geometric forms, 
and how those forms related to each other in two 
dimensions (Scarfo, 1989). These observations 
are further substantiated in Chapter 10 through 
a review of aspects of Donald Schon’s Reflective 
Practitioner (1983). After that research, numerous 
workshops with designers and planners showed me 
that the phrase “land use character” often refers to 
the two-dimensional character of land use areas 
seen on a map or functional (activity) areas on a 
site plan. Yet, the phrase is seemingly accepted as 
implicitly referring to the eye-level character of a 
place, when it doesn’t.
Designers’ predominant attention to objects 
in plan view, as elevations, and even Sketch-up 
models eliminates attention being given to people’s 
subjective experiences, their appreciations, feelings, 
and emotions. In doing so, why a design has the 
eye-level character it does, and why the spaces flow 
into each other as they do remain assumptions.
The place of an object or 
instrument, even if sometimes 
precisely assigned [i.e. objectively 
through agreement with 
others] does not derive from the 
nature of the object itself, but 
it is through me that place…is 
realized
(Sartre, 1966, 370–407).
Throughout The Analogy I argue for landscape 
architectural design to be recognized as a merger 
of the three domains of knowledge. Design is as 
much the efficient and cost-effective construction of details as it is the fabrication of places 
that respond to social norms and evoke lasting 
emotional responses in their reflection of personal memories (Hough, 1990; Marcus, 1995; 
Potteiger and Purinton, 1998; Schama, 1995). 
Our understanding of environmental design must 
go beyond Henri LeFabvre’s recognition that space 
is a social product (1979) and therefore a human 
construct and into what those social products say 
and how they are read. Landscapes, buildings, 
and interiors are each a human concept, and a 
changing one at that. Winston Churchill had it so 
right, “We shape our buildings and afterwards our 
buildings shape us” (Roberts, 2018, 8). The dialectic of evolving changes makes it clear that over 
time people form their landscape as it forms them 
(Nash, 1989; Schama, 1995). Our appreciations 
of interiors are formed and informed by what is 
functionally, psychologically, and aesthetically 
expressed (Beecher and Stowe, 1987; Girouard, 
1978; Rybczynski, 1986; Watts, 1975, 320–346). 
As agents of change, as designers, we are integral 
players in the ecology of a place. While our role as 
the designers of others’ lifeworlds may, at times, 
be seen as a bit perverse, wasteful, or self-­
destructive, we are still an inescapable part of the 
emerging content of a design. In considering landscape as a form of narrative, The Analogy pushes 
us to consciously consider not only a coherent 
story across a landscape but also people’s experiences as related to the sequential experiences that 
link personal spaces with larger public places.
The rationale driving The Analogy is the development of a person-centered design approach to 
landscape architectural design grounded in John 
Simonds’ epiphany that we design “...not places, 
20
spaces, or things [but] experiences (my italics). The 
places, spaces, and things take their form from  
the planned experience” (1961, 225). In a phrase, 
The Analogy is an experiential approach to 
design. The Analogy puts people’s expected experiences at the beginning of the design process 
and moves the benefits derived from geometric 
and basic design languages toward the end of the 
process where they are most beneficial. Within The 
Analogy, I consider Tier 1 to be Reading & Writing, 
or Language. Tier 2 is that of Basic Design, and Tier 
3 is Landscape Architectural Design. As we will see, 
it is very easy to interrelate each tier’s constituent 
parts and in doing so gain a deeper understanding 
of landscape architectural design.
TIER 1: LANGUAGE AND 
COMMUNICATION
An exploration of a landscape’s message-delivery 
capabilities begins with the first of the three tiers 
that comprise The Analogy: language. A close 
look into what constitutes a text’s basic parts, the 
ABCs, as it were, is provided here along with the 
role of the organizing principles of grammar and 
syntax or the rules that hold the parts together. 
That there is an environmental syntax or basic 
rules used to produce well-formed sentences, or 
for that matter environments, is laid out by Smith 
relative to
...a kind of syntax for the design 
of cities. The term ‘syntax’ is 
used to convey the idea of ‘rules 
of communication’. There is a 
constant transaction between 
the mind and the environment 
which is predominantly a 
matter of the brain interpreting 
environmental signals. 
Something as complex as 
urbanism communicates 
numerous ‘messages’ 
simultaneously. It is able to 
communicate because there 
seems to be a significant level of 
collective agreement about the 
‘meaning’ of shapes and spaces 
both on the cognitive level of 
information schemas and the 
‘deeper’ levels of instinct and 
symbolism.
(Smith, 1977, 14)
Figure 1.3 Analogy’s vertical relationships linking language, basic design, and landscape design. 
Drawn by author.
21
The building blocks that comprise The Analogy’s 
basic typology are, in later chapters, used as metaphors for their counterparts in Tier 2: Basic 
Design and Tier 3: Landscape Design. Simply 
stated, the letters of the alphabet are like points, 
points in a landscape by which people orient 
themselves, in which people gather, or intersections where people’s routes of travel intersect.
A courtyard is a good example of a point. 
People gather in it; or, we could look at it from 
the perspective that it draws people to it. Another 
example of a point would be a fountain set in the 
courtyard. People gather around it or use it to orient 
themselves. Expanding the language tier, sentences 
are like lines, paragraphs like planes, and volumes 
are, well, like the three-­dimensional volumes 
we call books. Used as metaphors, grammar and 
syntax help us to understand design principles, or 
what directs the organization of basic design elements (Ching, 1978; Wong, 1972; 1977). Even 
a minimal understanding of grammar and syntax 
can be used to inform our understanding of design 
themes and the principles that make those themes 
communicable and coherent. It is likely that 
we can all distinguish between a mystery and a 
comedy. Both are built upon the same alphabet, 
and many of the same words, and yet with a little 
reflection we begin to identify what makes them 
different. We can then bring that understanding 
into a design that calls for a sense of mystery, a bit 
of humor, a moment of reflection or meditation, or 
out-and-out happiness.
Grammar: System that guides 
the combining of words into 
larger units to convey ideas and 
information
(Guth, 1961, 5)
Syntax: Specific rules that order 
word usage; topical contexts: 
historical, geographical, and 
cultural. They call into play 
characteristic categories of 
viewpoints and word usage, e.g. 
history is time and geography 
is space; all spatially-related 
activities such as sailing and 
dance have their own particular 
nouns, verbs, and modifiers 
(adjectives and adverbs).
Idiom (usage): A word often 
combines with other words in an 
expression that is not molded on 
common grammatical patterns 
but that nevertheless becomes 
the habitual way of conveying a 
certain idea…ex. Bear in mind; 
change one’s mind; take one’s 
mind off…
(Guth, 1961, 80)
In recognizing that we read the arrangement, placement, orientation, and sequencing of “things” (as 
objects or masses and as spaces or voids), we come 
to recognize that there exist rules by which they are 
organized. For this reason, it is safe to say that the 
landscape-as-language approach to environmental design helps in the application of Alexander’s A 
Pattern Language: Towns, Building, and Construction 
(1977). In merging A Pattern Language with The 
Analogy, we come a step closer to that formula I 
sought as an undergraduate design student. With 
the landscape-as-language metaphor design decisions rely on the more comprehensive unfolding of 
a story than on the singular pleasure of how a group 
of objects is organized. In addition, an application 
of The Analogy shifts our focus from objects to the 
relationships between the objects in the spaces delineated by the objects (Bacon, 1974; Sitte, 1945) or the 
places where people live out their experiential lives.
What is interesting here is the similarity 
between grammar, syntax, and idiom and the 
22
three realms of knowledge noted earlier as the 
hard sciences, social sciences, and the expressive 
arts. The hard sciences provide the same building 
blocks used in the development of a landscape 
architectural design no matter where the design 
is located. Water runs downhill all the world 
around. In a similar manner, the English language 
and its 26-letter alphabet give rise to a relatively 
finite collection of words used by mothers and 
fathers, teenagers and technicians, politicians and 
policemen. The words each social group uses are 
organized in particular ways (syntax) that identify and distinguish one from the other. These 
topical contexts are further refined, or individualized, into local and regional (idiomatic) dialects 
of the particular language usage that identifies 
one ­profession or trade from another (medical vs. 
design, law vs. religion, and plumbing vs. carpentry). Carried to a humorous extreme (seen to the 
left) is the bit of Boston Pride written by an anonymous, I’m guessing, Bostonian.
Vocabularies become personalized by professions, individuals, and regional cultures. 
Alternative word usage provides for a local expression that becomes identified as the idiomatic expressions of a place set within its greater regional context. 
In basic design these structuring systems, or what we 
call design principles, make shapes and forms comprehensible and meaningful to the artists and the 
public. An extreme example of an idiomatic expression of art is found in folk art. So, as a spectrum of 
expressiveness of art the generic forms, or basic art 
forms, are refined through cultural interpretations 
(east/west; European/Middle Eastern) (Newton, 
1971; Rapoport, 1969, 1982) and then further 
refined through the idiomatic expressions of more 
regional and local interpretations. The spectrum of 
design principles employed in landscape, architectural, and interior design practices rests upon psychology, sociology, anthropology, and art, and is 
used to guide the authoring and communication of 
local and regionally appropriate narratives.
We are each born into our language. We all 
come to know how to communicate (body language, sign language, oral and written language). 
As we grow older, our knowledge of communication becomes a tacit or taken for granted 
understanding of our language. With little to no 
Figure 1.4 Talk like a Bostonian. Anonymous 
Facebook post 2019.
Figure 1.5.3 Cultural depictions of  
carved bird figures. Courtesy  
Gabreil Vandervort, ancient resource: 
http://www.ancientresource.com/.
Figure 1.5.1 Cultural 
 depictions of carved 
bird figures. Courtesy 
Bryce at Inuit Gifts.
Figure 1.5.2 Cultural 
depictions of carved bird 
figures. Courtesy Eleni, 
Handmade with Love, 
Greece.
23
thought we daily apply the rules of grammar and 
syntax learned in grade school. Through our everyday conversations we combine words to formulate 
sentences, sentences multiply to produce paragraphs, and paragraphs build into complete stories. 
We rarely question our knowledge of our language 
at a conscious level, yet we readily string words 
together as we interact with bankers and bakers, 
lawyers and lovers, and parents and children. Each 
time we speak or write we reinforce our language 
(the words we use, the ways in which we use them, 
and their meanings), our integral associations with 
our society and culture, and in turn our social and 
cultural values toward others and toward the land 
(Hall, 1969; Knapp, 1986; Rapoport, 1982).
The same associations of tacit knowledge and 
its being reinforced through use exist between 
us and our environments, be it an interior, a 
landscape, or a city. If this wasn’t the case, then 
Benzel’s interrelating a room to a region would be 
impossible (1998). As with our use of language, 
the associations that bind us through our environments with our social and cultural realms remain 
tacit. The purpose of what follows here is to 
transform your tacit knowledge into a collection 
of useful tools that contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of both basic design and 
landscape architectural design. Put another way, 
designers cannot take for granted how they associate with various landscape settings, let alone the 
details that make them up.
TIER 2: BASIC DESIGN
Basic design, an early stage in the landscape architectural design process, is based upon fundamental shapes and forms brought together in ways 
that make sense. The best way to “bring together” 
basic design features – point, line, plane, volume 
and series of volumes – is through an application 
of one or  more design principles such as unity, 
hierarchy, and gradation (Wong, 1972, 1977). 
Of course, once you grasp the “rules” you are in 
a better position to knowingly bend or ignore 
them. Such basic shapes work to provide a narrative’s fundamental messages. As basic shapes they 
have yet to be refined through landscape design 
needs such as material selection, finish, color, and 
maybe sounds and aromas but they still get a basic 
message across.
Figure 1.6 Basic elements of design: point, line, plane, volume. Drawn by author.
24
…spatial perspective matters. 
Don’t look down on the city 
from the skyscrapers, says Lewis 
Mumford, Jane Jacobs, and 
de Certeau; interpret from the 
sidewalk.
(Eckstein & Throgmorton, 
2003, 29)
Understanding the role of basic design is critical to 
the landscape narrative design process. An unpacking 
of the parts and principles of basic design, the basic 
messages expressed by the shapes making up every 
landscape design are fundamental to good design. 
The process of interpreting a written narrative into 
a storyboard is made easier as you determine the 
messages to be expressed. This will become all the 
more clear when you fill out the Emotion Matrix 
in Chapter 9. By extension, the beauty of adapting 
a storyboard into a final design is that as first- and 
­second-person narratives it holds the author/designer’s feet to the ground. The narrative content of a 
text, come basic design, come landscape design, 
occurs at eye level and develops a person’s on-theground experiences. What is surprising about this 
approach is that the identification of design features 
really isn’t all that difficult. As you’ll come to realize, 
writing about people participating in your designed 
space brings into view the design features that come 
to make up the design. Your written narrative’s characters will help you see what comes to make up your 
design’s landscape narrative.
As a reminder, to avoid confusion, two forms 
of applications of narrative are used throughout 
The Analogy. One form of narrative is what you 
will write as a way of illuminating your design’s 
users’ experiences and expectations. The other 
form is what the users of your built design will 
read in their surroundings as they move toward, 
into, and through your design.
Basic design, as both process and product, is 
the foundation of the various professions comprising the fine and applied arts. As a bridge in 
the three-tiered analogy, basic design connects (or 
spans the gap between) language and environmental design. Basic design strengthens the idea 
that landscape architecture is an art form. For that 
matter, we can consider each of the environmental design professions an art form that interprets 
and applies the sciences and technologies in the 
planned development and construction of their 
products. As such, this realization keeps alive my 
thought that there exists a formulaic approach to 
not just “doing design” but doing great design. 
Basic design gives us the ability to manipulate 
math and science into aesthetically pleasing habitable environments of appropriate social, cultural, and historic significance. By merging the 
world (the physical domain of objective knowledge) with our world (the social domain of subjective knowledge) and our personal and collective 
expressions (the emotional domain of aesthetic 
knowledge), the objective qualities of a space give 
way to the expressive qualities of place. This metamorphosis of the objective into the subjective is 
integral to landscape architecture, architecture, 
interior design, and planning in its various applications, including ecological planning and design. 
Or, as Randy Hester refers to it, “the soul of the 
place” (Hester, 2006, 118–127).
Scarfo: Within minutes of 
being given a site and the 
request to design a small, 
vest pocket park, I overheard 
students discussing bench 
materials and, no joke, the 
diameter of bolts to be used 
in a bench all without even 
knowing if a bench would even 
be included in their design.
Seeing basic design situated in The Analogy, as 
shown in Figure 1.2 between language and landscape architectural design, helps newcomers to 
the practice of design avoid the tendency to pick 
nifty landscape stuff out of thin air and sprinkle it 
about their designs. As a bridge linking language 
and landscape design, basic design allows us to 
25
focus on the relationships that are part and parcel 
of basic design elements, e.g., points gather energy 
and draw attention to themselves (Ching, 1978, 20; 
Dondis, 1973, 40). And yet, the basic design elements of point, line, plane, and volume are abstractions. As an outgrowth of a design’s experiential 
narrative, points, lines, planes, and volumes are 
molded to simultaneously fit with the users’ expectations and their surroundings. Why a designer 
would want to use a particular basic design feature, 
or composition of features, quickly becomes apparent when considering the greater context, the body 
of the narrative text, or story. Within the language 
tier of The Analogy, dealing with a word instead 
of a point, a sentence instead of a linear feature, or 
a composition of paragraphs instead of a series of 
volumes allows a design student freedom to deal 
with basic forms and put off struggling with the 
minutia of what’s to be communicated by the 
design later in the design process.
More detailed design decisions come later in 
the narrative-storyboard-design process. Some 
detailed decisions will be called for as you turn 
your narrative into a storyboard, but the majority of the detailed decisions will appear when the 
storyboard is turned into the final design. With 
this progression from broader to increasingly 
detailed decision-making The Analogy’s design 
process becomes less complicated, less messy. The 
same holds true when a landscape design is first 
considered in terms of its basic design elements. 
Rather than the myriad of problems to be solved 
regarding plant selections, sun angles, construction techniques, and who’s doing what and where, 
the designer is able to concentrate on the spatial 
structure of a proposed built environment. The 
design’s spatial structure is guided by a narrative 
that expresses the users’ expectations. Then that 
basic design is massaged in response to increasingly more detailed requirements of the design’s 
setting: level, sloping, rural, urban, densely or 
sparsely populated.
TIER 3: LANDSCAPE DESIGN
The third tier of The Analogy focuses on landscape architectural design, the narrative’s four- 
­dimensional built form. However, as noted earlier, 
The Analogy is easily applied to the work of architects, interior designers, and, to a certain extent, 
land planners.
By combining our innate understanding of 
narrative form with basic design, we quickly come 
to recognize the contextual bases on which we 
make design decisions. Excellent examples linking 
life and urban environments – basic design and 
landscape – are found in Kevin Lynch’s Image 
of the City (Lynch, 1960). His five-year study 
focused on urban residents’ use of mental maps 
to better identify with and find meaning in 
their surroundings. Lynch helps us understand 
that learning landscape architectural design best 
occurs in conjunction with people’s everyday situations and is not the discrete, personal expression 
of a designer. A narrative, any story that presents 
users’ perceptions and experiences, immediately 
introduces one or more contexts or themes. With 
that, the selection of things, characteristic spaces, 
and materials to be used becomes narrowed. And 
that’s a good thing.
Take a moment and reflect on a simple design 
project with which you’ve been involved. Maybe 
building a bookcase. Consider all the contexts 
that came into play: living room, bedroom, study, 
hallway to kitchen. Once you recognize the contexts in which the bookcase will be set, the choices 
of what can and cannot be used in your project 
are reduced. Design components are seen for what 
they are, contextual and context-driven, relevant 
to the social and physical surroundings in which 
they are located (Chatman, 1980; Schama, 1995). 
Whether a side yard or urban public garden or 
plaza, a place-specific narrative, a story derived 
from and set in a particular location, cannot 
escape its social, historical, geographical, and ecological contexts. To introduce a design with little 
or no relationship to its contexts would have it 
seem “out of place” (Hough, 1990).
Put another way, a narrative may express 
the satisfaction of arriving at a destination, 
having seen it from a distance and finally arriving through a series of discoveries. Such a narrative occurs in thousands of places, millions 
of times a day: bus stop, front door of child’s 
school, coffee shop on the way to work. When 
designing a sequence of discoveries, moments 
26
of reorientation, and the satisfaction associated with arrival at a destination, the selection 
of basic forms that make up this progression 
reduces the number of ways it can be expressed. 
This is not to say that your opportunities to challenge your creativity are reduced. They aren’t. 
As your design’s context(s) become a factor, the 
design features you can chose from are becoming narrowed. A design’s location in a particular place – Seattle vs. Los Angles or Boston vs. 
Miami, or a particular neighborhood in one of 
those cities – reduces the selection of material 
resources that can be used, and the answers to 
design decisions to be arrived at. This thinking 
is why the post-modern corrugated metal house 
set in a historic neighborhood says the designer 
and homeowner are either ignorant or disdainful 
of the house’s socio-cultural setting and of the 
neighbors and the neighborhood’s sense of place.
That is the great distinction 
between the sexes. Men 
see objects, women see the 
relationships between the objects.
(Fowles, 1965, 373)
They [men] are interested in 
“objects” and “things” rather 
than people and feelings” (16)...
the Venusians [women] are more 
concerned with living together in 
harmony, community, and loving 
cooperation. Relationships are 
more important than work and 
technology.
(Gray, 1992, 18)
Because men tend to be good 
with mechanical and spatial 
activities, they get emotionally 
attached to building, fixing, 
and chasing things (11)... Life 
is much more of a process for 
women than it is for men (12).
(Farrel and Farrel, 2001, 
11–12)
In other words, working within a given setting, 
drawing on the surrounding color, material, and 
spatial palettes, environmental designs are less 
likely to be considered “out of place.” They fit. 
They look like they belong. They are one more 
part of a much larger whole. Whether designers 
work with (in harmony) or against (in contrast) 
a given context, the important fact is that they 
come to do so consciously, respectfully. Design 
decisions are helped and in a sense guided by 
their larger social and geographical settings. As 
such, information drawn from a project’s contexts 
contributes to the justification and legitimization 
of design decisions. Recognizing contexts, and 
responsibly working with them, quickly involves 
students in expressing “why” they did this or that 
rather than the “how.” The “how” of design, the 
technological and economic wranglings giving 
form to design decisions, remains more appropriately a response to the design’s production 
(construction and site engineering) than a major 
factor used to justify a design’s form and content.
MESSAGES, MEANINGS, 
AND NARRATIVES
Looking back, I admit that my early exploration 
of The Analogy remained focused more on things, 
individual messages (“walk here,” “sit there,” or 
“enter here”), the physical objects of language 
and design, than on the relationships or dialectical interactions that both formed and informed 
those things and the people who lived with them. 
Thanks to the late Harry Porter, at the University 
of Virginia, I came to realize that as texts, landscapes went well beyond communicating discrete 
27
one-liners or singular statements. Landscapes are 
four dimensional. They are not snapshots or stilllife images. Working up a design is like scripting 
and shooting a movie (Aminzadeh et al. 2016). 
Landscapes embody and reflect the ongoing development of people’s morals, values, ideologies, and 
personal and collective aesthetics (Duncan, 1990; 
Ley, 1983). Landscapes are the manifestation of 
a continuum of interrelationships across spaces. 
Landscapes are narratives.
In 1989, at the conclusion of my presentation of 
the three-tiered analogy, Harry Porter’s simple question, “What’s the moral of the story?” took me years 
to realize that he had simultaneously provided me 
with a question and its answer. At the time I thought 
he meant “What is the moral of my presentation?” 
and said I was confused by the question. He broadened his question to something like, “Using the 
Analogy to design a landscape, what’s the moral of 
the story or design that the users of the design walk 
away with?” I didn’t know. As I said, at that time I 
was too focused on the individual things that made 
up the typology. I was aware there was a message 
content but had yet to consider the messages as comprising a more complete narrative and the implications of narratives as design development tools.
I came upon my first Military 
Orchid... I fell on my knees 
before it in a way that 
all botanists will know. I 
identified... I measured, I 
photographed, worked out where 
I was on the map, for future 
reference...Yet, five minutes 
later...I suffered a strange feeling. 
I realized I had not actually seen 
the three plants...I had managed 
to set the experience in a kind 
of present past, a having looked, 
even as I was temporally and 
physically still looking...I knew I 
had just fallen, in the stupidest 
possible way, into an ancient 
trap. It is not necessarily too little 
knowledge that causes ignorance; 
possessing too much, or wanting 
to gain too much, can produce 
the same result.
(Fowles, 1979, There are  
no page numbers; look for:  
Oak January,  
Derbyshire)
Back then, my understanding of a landscape’s 
expressive potential was static, still confined to 
the delivery of single messages. As scary as this 
now sounds to me, back then I was still of the 
mind that the environment was more or less a 
snapshot of an area. That is the way I had been 
taught, to see and deal with the landscape as a 
two-­dimensional site plan. I later realized that 
my view of environments and people was derived 
from my science background and early design 
education. Much of it objectified people. In many 
instances, people were little more than assumed to 
exist and somehow cultural environments are, as 
if by magic, miraculously altered over time. Like 
John Fowles’ admission to having seen/studied 
his first Military Orchid but not experienced it, 
I wasn’t yet seeing people as agents of change – 
as actively involved in place making. Maybe that 
is what distinguishes the formulas of science 
from the authoring of a narrative. First- and 
­second-person narratives are explicitly subjective, 
or at least implied by the personification of landscapes and their features (Berry, 1964; Eiseley, 
1957; Jackson, 1977). If I knew then what I know 
now my response to Harry’s question would have 
been “Everyone reads landscapes. Landscapes are 
narratives. The Analogy can be applied to authoring landscape designs and as a result provide both 
practical and emotionally appropriate experiences 
to those who enjoy our work.” Or, something on 
that idea.
28
As with most design education, my training, 
up to when I began to explore the language-­
narrative metaphor, had been primarily visually 
based. I was trained to see the designed environment more like a still-life photo than a cinematic 
dynamic of unfolding experiences. I was yet to 
realize that landscapes are more like films than 
snapshots, that people’s character is found in a 
site’s evolving social context, that a place’s local 
character is interrelated with its historical context, 
and that all of our senses play a role in our identifying, reading, and interpreting what we encounter as we move through time and across space.
…the cultural landscape is 
fashioned from a natural 
landscape by a culture group. 
Culture is the agent, the 
natural area is the medium, 
the cultural landscape is the 
result. Under the influence of 
a given culture, itself changing 
through time, the landscape 
undergoes development, passing 
through phases, and probably 
reaching ultimately the end of 
its cycle of development. With 
the introduction of a different 
– that is, an alien – culture, 
a rejuvenation of the cultural 
landscape sets in, or a new 
landscape is superimposed on the 
remnants of an older one.
(Sauer, 1925, 46)
Years later, with my realization of film, music, and 
paintings as narrative forms, and my immersion 
in historical, cultural, and social geography, The 
Analogy’s typology acquired its current three-part 
foundation: social, spatial, and temporal. John 
Conron, Geraldine Pratt, and Marvin D’Lugo’s 
courses at Clark University in Worcester, MA, 
helped me learn that texts are more than linear; 
they are additive processes of communication. 
Understanding that a landscape is more than a text, 
that it is a narrative, brought with it the realization 
that people interact with their surrounding environments more so than I had ever thought: step 
by step, moment by moment. There is an ongoing 
dialectic. As people interact with their surroundings, they acquire information through their senses 
in ways that blend statements into messages and 
messages into an even greater choreography.
Landscape narratives are simultaneously repositories for and mirrors of people’s values, their appreciations of life, and in some respects their lack of 
appreciation (Marcus, 1995; 1999). Landscapes not 
only provide the settings for stories, they are also 
the stories, whether expository, poetic, purely functional, or spiritually moving in the most sublime 
sense. A place’s displayed material culture is like a 
physical manifestation of people’s oral histories and 
local histories. Oral history sustains people’s deeply 
held meanings and values over long periods of time. 
Yet, while the vehicles of expression may change the 
basic story and the walk-away messages remain the 
same (Campbell, 1949; Chatman, 1980; Rubin, 
1995).
Since I began learning landscape architecture 
my attention was drawn to cultural landscapes. 
The physical manifestation of social interactions, 
the palimpsests of people’s overlain experiences 
building upon artifacts, and their bundles of 
memories socially given to and reflected off their 
surroundings. This realization introduced a new 
dimension to both my skill and my responsibility 
as a designer-author of landscape texts. Context 
was not just what I found at and around a given 
site, context was a place’s past as evident in the 
present and moving into the future (Schama, 
1995; Yamin and Metheny, 1996). As a narrative, 
the landscape text both forms and informs its 
users within the continuum of their everyday lives 
as set within the broader biographies and local 
and regional histories and heritage. Landscape 
narratives communicate three levels or domains 
of information: at the surface, the functional and 
practical; slightly deeper, the socio-cultural aspects 
29
of history and heritage; and at the deepest level, 
archetypes as found in our collective unconscious. 
Our deepest beliefs that sustain our humanity.
Landscapes, designed landscapes in particular, 
need to communicate what is noted in the definition of landscape architecture and the other 
design professions. Designers contribute to environments that serve the public’s health, safety, 
and welfare by designing places that serve useful, 
aesthetic, safe, and enjoyable purposes. The fact is 
that as design professionals, we work in the service 
of others. That service, by definition, involves our 
identification with and satisfying of other’s needs 
within the contexts of local ecology, social setting, 
and history. An excellent starting point to recognize those needs is Maslow’s hierarchy of human 
needs (1970). And with those we start with the 
basic human needs of sustenance, shelter, and 
safety.
Exposition...to provide necessary 
information concerning 
characters and events existing 
before the action proper to 
the story begins. Its emphasis 
is strongly explanatory...
traditionally done in the 
summary mode.
(Chatman, 1980, 67)
Still niggling away at me, Harry Porter’s question prompted me to begin to distinguish between 
the message and meaning capabilities expressed 
within a designed environment. As a text, a landscape, its contents and their composition, and the 
interrelated organization of both, is the grammatical guide through which messages are sequentially 
expressed (Swaffield, 1995, 1996) and become a 
narrative. Those messages may be delivered in an 
expository form, expressing information necessary 
to people’s health, safety, and welfare, such as “walk 
here,” “sit, relax, and refresh,” “watch out for this 
hazard,” or “this space will allow you safe passage.” 
Other message types are poetic and prosaic delivering information as more abstract (calling into 
play contemplative reflection) or pragmatic (local 
vernacular) forms, respectively. The other part of 
the distinction is the recognition that the medium 
does communicate a certain understanding of the 
designer, the period in which the design was done, 
and the history and social norms of the designer’s 
setting. This is a gross simplification, so for now 
I’ll note that the critical theorists, and the various 
deconstructionist schools of thought, recognize 
that the medium does provide cues and clues 
as to the author’s values, attitudes, and politics 
(Giddens, 1984). Another way to consider this is 
that as designers of others’ environments we need 
to be aware of the values and attitudes we bring 
with us – and sometimes put them aside to enable 
us to adopt those of the users.
More than any other botanist of 
his time, Thoreau moved past the 
mere naming of trees – the nouns 
of the forest – to track the verbs: 
the birds, rodents, and insects 
that pollinate flowers or disperse 
seeds, and all the other agents 
that shape the forest’s structure.
(Nabham, 1993, xvi)
In Chapter 2, the typological units are explored 
as they contribute to the meanings and messages 
Figure 1.7 Maslow’s hierarchy with five levels 
of needs in human motivation. Shutterstock ID: 
554319703. Contributor: Iamnee.
30
related to three overlapping message domains: 
functional, socio-cultural, and deeply emotional, 
or what Carl Jung identifies as the collective 
unconscious (Storr, 1983). Functional messages 
are in a sense expressed as the nouns and verbs 
of design: objects and actions. Actions as motion 
bring (or guide) people to the basic messages of 
everyday activities such as entrance, exit; come 
over here, go there; “Yep, I can get there from 
here.” This is design in its stripped-down basic 
state, basic messages yet to be modified/enhanced 
with environmental adverbs and adjectives.
Based on Maslow’s hierarchy, I believe landscape users, in an effort to satisfy their basic 
needs, look for, read, and interpret the functional 
domain’s messages first. They read the pragmatic 
messages such as “come here,” “go that way,” and 
“stop.” Functional messages provide for people’s immediate safety and welfare, something I 
became acutely aware of when I suddenly found 
myself one winter sporting a pair of crutches. I 
immediately read my surroundings through a new 
lens. Suddenly I read the placement, alignment, 
and organization of, within, and between objects 
on the land at a functional level for the purpose 
of maintaining my crutch-dependent welfare. My 
“perspective” had changed, not in terms of height 
above the ground but in terms of my stability 
and space required (now with crutches splaying 
outward to the right and left) for me to move 
about safely on one foot instead of two.
A person in a wheelchair reads a landscape’s 
lines, planes, and volumes differently than a child, 
a bicyclist, a parent pushing a stroller, or a 6′4″ tall 
pedestrian. People’s primary concern is with their 
ability to make it over, around, into, through, or 
past a landscape feature, whether they are carrying 
groceries from the car to their house or finding their 
way from a parking lot to a park’s interpretive center. 
With a designer’s recognition that designed environments need to address a users’ practical comfort, or 
what I consider mundane, everyday aesthetic experiences, design begins to deal with the shapes and 
forms of a landscape’s foreground, middle ground, 
and background as a cohesive continuum. The functional domain of landscape messages is the foundation for statements that express culture and place, 
the landscape narrative’s second domain.
Aspects of place (space) and history (time) 
are easily introduced into functional environments designed for functional efficiency. With 
the addition of adjective and adverb modifiers 
like color, texture, a material’s finishes, a space’s 
basic functional messages acquire the more contextual aspects of period, place, and their emotional content and context. A retail parking lot in 
a Southwestern town may have the same dimensions as one found in Old Town Alexandria, 
Virginia, but in Old Town the southwestern 
materials, colors, and textures would readily be 
felt to be out of place in the Colonial Virginia 
setting. Being able to find your way around 
a place is one thing, being in the right state of 
mind to properly read and interpret what’s there 
is another. A person’s state of mind does as much 
to structure expectations, what is anticipated in 
terms of a particular landscape’s vocabulary, as 
does the functional context in which a person executes his or her daily routines. Being lost is when 
you do not find the shapes and forms you expect 
as cues and markers to where you thought you 
were going, even while the spaces function well.
The third domain of environmental messages and meanings looks behind landscape as 
medium and message, beyond the surficial readings of use, and into the deeper collective values 
people bring to and reinforce in landscape spaces 
and landscape character. Understanding the existence and inclusion of deeper meanings is helped 
through a review of semiotics, or the study of signs, 
symbols, and symbolism, as embodied in designed 
and natural environments. The ways in which 
functional messages are delineated speaks volumes 
in terms of social and cultural values, a people’s 
attitudes toward others and toward the land. 
Robert Frost said fences make good neighbors, yet 
the Berlin Wall divided a people who had lived a 
different definition of neighbor prior to 1961. 
Streets may promote commerce between places, 
but as gangland turf boundaries they have just as 
often worked to separate people only 60′ apart and 
contributed to the death of neighborhoods.
Consider the Vietnam Veterans Memorial: directional walkways, you can see the beginning and end 
at the same time. One wall points to and visually 
connects you with the Washington Monument, 
31
the other in the direction of the Lincoln Memorial. 
Functionally an easy read. But then the names, the 
58,390 men and women’s names (as of 2019), in 
the highly polished black granite in which you see 
your image reflected as you walk deeper and deeper 
into the ground. I’ll let you consider the messages, 
the deeper sense of a people and a time in their 
history. But functionally, “Yep, I can walk the 250’ 
from this end to that end.” 
Look at the photographs of the Browne’s 
Addition neighborhood closely. At the functional 
message-delivery level the landscape narrative is 
pretty straightforward. Sidewalks, steps, walkways 
to front doors, handrail points up toward doors, and 
roads for vehicles. Some sidewalks are provided with 
cooling shade during the heat of the summer. No 
apparent obstacles or tripping hazards. All the surfaces, lines, and objects are pretty straight-­forward 
invitations to come and visit. You’re welcome. Some 
front doors are even preceded by covered porches 
with chairs and walkways that connect the street 
to the porch, stoop, and front door area. Some  
don’t. With some houses (Figures 1.13 and 1.14) 
you can’t even see if there are front doors, a statement made less welcoming by the fact there are no 
walkways from street or sidewalk to the front door. 
Maybe cars and people only come and go through 
the garage. At the deepest message-delivery level 
the houses with strong visual connections to the 
street (transportation, commerce, public services) 
call to you in a welcoming way and say that the 
inhabitants of the houses are not only connected 
to the greater community but also actively interrelated with it. They express community. Without 
those statements what do you read? Are you openly 
welcomed; or welcomed at all? Is the sidewalk-less, 
walkway-less, front door-less neighborhood just 
a collection of individuals? Then think about the 
sidewalks, if there are any. Set back from the street, 
as opposed to adjacent to the roadway, winters are 
made much easier when snow isn’t plowed from 
the street onto the sidewalks. What does this say 
about a city that makes it a hazard to walk in the 
wintertime? Daniel Kemmis (1990; 1995) provides 
a wonderful analysis of community, not through 
walkable streets and interconnected homes but 
a marketplace in Missoula, Montana. What he 
shares is, however, easily modified to fit into these 
photographs in ways that help further express the 
landscape narratives seen here.
I’ve not done a detailed analysis, but believe 
I can date a neighborhood by the presence or 
absence of sidewalks set along the curb or set back 
with a green strip between sidewalk and street, 
walkways connecting street to houses’ front doors, 
readily visible front doors with covered stoops or 
Figure 1.8 Vietnam Veterans Memorial: visitors 
reflected in names of those who served and 
died. Photo by author.
Figure 1.9 Browne’s addition neighborhood, 
Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
Figure 1.10 Browne’s addition neighborhood, 
Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
32
better yet porches with swings and chairs. The 
presence, absence, and configuration of those 
landscape expressions also say something about 
the prevalent social norms of the time. There is 
a social-psychology at play here. Given the structures were built with city approval (and paid 
permits), consider what they say about those who 
bought them and live in them?   
When I became aware of the existence of landscapes’ symbolic content I began listening for how 
it was recognized in designers’ works, planners’ 
debates over growth management, and ecologists’ 
views on sustainability. Twenty-five years ago I 
found little recognition of the deeper meanings 
local residents held for the sites on which designers and planners worked. I hear more today from 
designers who live and work close to their design 
projects, less and less as the distance between 
home, work, and project site increases.
More frequently than found in design literature, the spirit, the culture, the humanity 
of a place is read in the works of the “nature 
writers,” or those I refer to as “place writers”: 
Figure 1.12 Four photos, Manito/Cannon Hill neighborhood, in Spokane, WA’s South Hill.  
Photos by author.
Figure 1.11 Browne’s addition neighborhood, 
Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
33
Emerson (1971), Thoreau (1973; 1993), Muir 
(1988; 1997), Gary Snyder (1996), Tom Horton 
(1987; 2002), and Annie Dillard (1990), and 
any number of writings by Wendell Berry (1964; 
1968; 2013), Loren Eiseley (1957; 1978), and 
Barry Lopez (2019) to name a few. I know we can 
argue about this, but generally speaking, while 
many earth artists (Goldsworthy, 1990; 2015; 
Lippard, 1983; Smithson, 1996) are assuredly 
in touch with a place’s spirit(s) I don’t deal with 
them here because earth art may be ephemeral, 
visited and experienced but rarely lived in.
Mythic forms...may be 
regarded as either pointing 
past themselves to mysteries 
or universal import, or as 
functions merely of local ethnic 
or even personal idiosyncrasies.
(Campbell, 1974, 11)
The line place writers walk between fiction and 
non-fiction has a lot to offer environmental 
designers’ understanding of what contributes to a 
sense of place. Meanings, values, heritage, romanticism, these are the invisible forces of both consistency and change that rarely appear as part of 
a designer’s site inventory or GIS database. The 
invisible forces that bind people and place are 
what is read between the lines. One of the few 
landscape architects I am aware who recognized 
that interiors, architecture, and landscapes are 
read by their users was Andrew Jackson Downing 
(1969). As for me, in working with the physically 
impaired and people of other cultures, I am again 
and again made to realize people’s relationships 
with their environments are the basis for how well 
they maintain the character of their surroundings: 
e.g., personal objects may be used again and again 
yet seem to remain in their places. I believe that 
if designers work with those human dynamics, 
such as sense of identity and meaningfulness, then 
a design as it includes its users will, in a sense, 
take care of itself. Work against the grain, ignore 
people’s deeper values that form and inform their 
Figure 1.13 Veradale neighborhood, Spokane, 
WA. Photo by author.
Figure 1.14 Comstock neighborhood, Spokane 
Valley, WA. Photo by author.
Figure 1.15 Manito/Cannon Hill neighborhood, 
Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
34
daily routines, and their sense of identity, and a 
design quickly disintegrates into what the users 
identify with which isn’t the product they got.
Harry Porter’s question of how The Analogy 
could be applied to design stayed with me for 
years. Looking back, I realize that as I worked to 
answer his question I became aware of the social, 
cultural, and personal meanings and values that 
overlay and are embedded in the physical aspects 
of an environment. What I now understand as a 
landscape’s potential to communicate messages, to 
simultaneously build and bind places and people, 
took on a dynamic and interactive character. 
Whether landscape or architectural, personal or 
cultural, interior or exterior, space is a social product 
(Lefebvre, 1976; 1979; 1994; Lund, 2012). Seeing 
built environments as social products was the first 
of my realizations of the interplay between people 
and their physical surroundings and the language 
and abstractions designers use to record and recreate those surroundings. Lefebvre’s statement 
allowed me to comprehend John Simonds’ realization that as designers, we “plan experiences. The 
places, spaces, and things take their form from the 
planned experience” (Simonds, 1961, 225). I also 
came to realize that people’s experiences are gained 
through a dialectic form of social interaction 
(Giddens, 1984; Gottdiener, 1985) between them 
and their places, spaces, and things. The structure 
embedded in the idea that as designers we author 
narratives was becoming set in my mind. So to was 
the idea that planning or designing experiences was 
the cornerstone on which authoring landscape narratives would rest.
Working with the three domains of landscape narrative’s expressions (immediate practical, less immediate socio-cultural, deep collective 
unconscious) easily moves our exploration of the 
meaning filled content of people’s landscapes into 
the social ecology of dwelling in place (Ardalan 
and Bakhtiar, 1973; Bacon, 1974; NorbergSchulz, 1985; Rowles and Bernard, 2013; Sitte, 
1945) or the routines or continually evolving 
relationships people have with the spaces they 
inhabit. As a continuum, the ongoing ebb and 
flow that is daily life helps move our realization 
of individual messages to their being sequentially 
linked into narratives.
As a cultural medium, whether vernacular or 
professionally designed, the serial nature of landscape, architectural, and interior spaces involves 
a continuum of unfolding messages that become 
a story to the user/reader of that narrative. The 
unfolding is generally an outcome of a person’s 
movement from a foreground vantage point, on 
through the middle and then into the background 
which in turn becomes the foreground, over and 
over. In reading about narrative I came to understand that the form, function, and structure of 
oral history contribute a further clarification to 
landscape as narrative, and to the introduction of 
narrative into design process.
The 
particularly 
interactive-interpretative 
processes employed by the users of designed 
environments are clarified as we explore oral 
history (Rubin, 1995) and the narrative structure 
employed in fiction and film (Chatman, 1980). 
Bringing an understanding of story and discourse 
into the lived-in world of design process and 
designed environments is further helped with 
Giddens’s structuration and communication theories (Giddens, 1979; 1984) and the analyses of 
spatial readings by such geographers as Duncan 
(1990), Duncan and Ley (1993), Barnes and 
Duncan (1992), and Wood and Beck (1994). 
These authors, and more, recognize that people 
spaces are read and that there are multiple, but 
not exhaustive, potential interpretations a reader 
may make of a given text. They also note that by 
recognizing and working to develop a design’s 
theme boundaries are introduced (Rubin’s semantic context) within which design (narrative) decisions are made.
Stated differently, a design’s intended theme 
provides designers with focus. The design of a dog 
park likely would not include messages associated 
with an off-road vehicle park. Accepting to design 
an outdoor wedding venue would….well you 
decide what you would find there: some things 
could be included, some shouldn’t. Message 
boundaries derived from a place’s theme provide 
the designer-author with narrative constraints. 
The act of doing design, of dealing with seemingly 
infinite decisions to be made, is, in reality, not as 
hopelessly open ended as many students tend to 
believe. A park with a river running through it 
35
provides a wholly different set of activities than 
a park without a stream or river. As a result, one 
provides for a somewhat different narrative that 
the other cannot.
As clarified here, creativity is not a license to do 
whatever a designer pleases. There is a bounded, 
developmental character to the authoring of a 
story. Within a given theme, let’s say inclusive 
play area, or public transit stop, or a personal 
getaway, what is to be communicated, how it is 
to be communicated, and the spatial and temporal sequences used to express each narrative gain 
their organization from the “recursive character 
of social life” (Giddens, 1979, 41). The repetition of those messages associated with particular 
shapes, forms, and sequences builds our landscape 
vocabulary, and in turn our landscape grammar. 
In other words, people cannot escape who they 
are, their personal biography, or their cultural 
history. In understanding this, Giddens sees people’s regularly repetitive activities as reinforcing, 
or as giving structure to and being structured 
by their heritage, where they grew up. The idea 
of developing a part of a landscape narrative by 
what spatially and temporally precedes it is found 
in such concepts as Rubin’s “constraint” (1995), 
Chatman’s “reading out” (1980), and Rapoport’s 
“cues” (1982) all of which are used to outline 
ways to apply narration to design process. These 
approaches are dealt with further in Chapters 
7, 8, and 9: Narrative, Authoring a Landscape 
Narrative, and Storyboarding, respectively.
The Analogy’s progression of linking basic 
design elements to deep-rooted social and cultural meanings identifies and combines the 
observable world as filtered through people’s 
memories and those memories’ contribution 
to a place’s local character. This blend of qualitative and quantitative information enables the 
“doing of design” to act as a bridge that joins 
basic design elements with people’s everyday 
appreciations and comfort. As masses and voids, 
basic design elements are the fundamentals of a 
landscape’s character. The selection, articulation, 
and arrangement of those features embodies and 
reflects people’s investment in their surroundings, a commitment to dwelling, a continuous 
movement toward comfort, whether in a residential property, neighborhood, community, 
or region. Being on the land over time, people’s 
acts of “becoming” are the human dimensions of 
both social and natural ecology. People are both 
natural resources and stewards of the natural 
resources. Once arranged to be comfortable and 
meaningful, as articulated by Norberg-Schulz 
(1985) and Rowles and Bernard (2013), the 
user group(s) tend to care for and sustain their 
immediate environments (sustain their sense of 
identity). We could say they steward their surroundings. This idea is seen in how people maintain the arrangement of objects on their desks. 
Move a stapler or cup of coffee on someone’s 
desk and within minutes they will be moved 
back “into place,” meeting the individual’s personal sense of space/place. People are the bearers 
of social constructs that daily reaffirm their personal, social, and cultural sense of identity, of 
being in place.
Contrary to my first encounter with design, I 
now realize design is not a mystery. Design is at the 
intersection of the dynamics that bind the lives of 
the people we serve and the land they inhabit. The 
results of that intersection are lasting, even when 
the designs aren’t. Learning design is a sweet not 
sour experience. This is not to say that there aren’t 
many, many difficult, pertinent questions in need 
of research and that there aren’t individuals who 
seem to have been “born” with a “natural” talent 
for design and for teaching. Design, though, as 
process and product has bases that can be readily 
identified, taught, learned, and communicated 
clearly to others. This is the goal of Storytelling for 
Landscape Architecture: Learning Design Through 
Analogy. 
2
A Typology
C
hristopher 
Alexander 
(1979) 
and 
Raymond Williams (1983) both speak 
to the languages that bind us to each 
other, to our cultures, and to the physical worlds 
we inhabit. Alexander speaks to the architecture 
of the built world about which we move and 
socialize. Williams helps us better understand our 
world of words that make up our politics, religion, 
social groups, and individual selves. They impress 
me because they are of such different camps and 
yet share many of the same thoughts. 
The [pattern] language, and 
the processes that stem from it, 
merely release the fundamental 
order which is native to us. 
They do not teach us, they only 
remind us of what we know 
already, and of what we shall 
discover time and time again, 
when we give up our ideas and 
opinions, and do exactly what 
emerges from ourselves.
(Alexander, 1979, xv)
The idea of sharing in Alexander’s use of the collective “we” is reinforced when Williams says, 
Within our common language, 
in a particular country [social 
group or profession] we can be 
conscious of social differences, 
or of differences of age, but 
in the main we use the same 
words for most everyday things 
and activities though with 
some variations of rhythm and 
accent and tone.
(Williams, 1983, 11)
If that analogy [narrative as 
landscape] is any good, then 
the way to create computer 
narratives is to define the features 
of the landscape to be explored, 
and let those define the path. 
Before I go any further (so to 
speak) I want to explain how I 
came to believe that narrative 
really is landscape.
(Hughes, 1997)
The Analogy’s typological basis to learning how 
to develop landscape architectural designs based 
on how we learned to read and write bolsters our 
understanding of the landscape as a repository 
and medium of expression. Messages expressed in 
the shapes and forms of our built worlds communicate functions, aspects of culture and heritage, 
and the values associated with our deepest collective beliefs. The typology asks us to identify and 
organize the fundamental elements of expression 
within each tier of The Analogy: language, basic 
design, and landscape architectural design. Once 
identified, the basic components of reading and 
writing, basic design, and landscape design are 
more easily reviewed for their relationships with 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-3
37
38
each other and the relationships they enable us 
to have with others and with the physical world. 
With this understanding, we can study basic 
landscape components, as expressive signs and 
symbols, with regard to the greater wholes we 
construct through their use. However, before 
we unpack The Analogy’s three tiers we need to 
become aware of the social dynamics in which 
they are both products and processes.
As Richard Lyon puts it: Noise 
is as much psychology as physics. 
Car buyers, Lyon points out, are 
apt to spurn a car if its doors 
shut with a tinny clank. “Sound 
is information”.
(Wolkomir, 1996, 56)
Reading and writing, basic design within the arts, 
and landscapes, structures, and interior spaces 
are simultaneously social products and social 
processes, each reacting to the other. They exist 
through our collective need to use signs and 
symbols that gather, record, hold, and communicate messages and meanings. The visual and 
audible (oral/aural) signs we accept as words 
enable us to interact with each other. As speech 
acts, spoken thoughts enable us to recognize, 
record, verify truths, and reuse agreed-upon signs 
as a means of sharing information, retaining what 
we have learned from our experiences, and generating new knowledge. In turn, our evolving 
knowledge of the landscape’s signs and symbols 
contributes to our safe use and appreciation of the 
environments we inhabit. Our ability to remember, interpret, and understand what is communicated by our environments also occurs through 
our other senses, e.g., the memories, behaviors, 
and values associated with the smell of a bakery 
versus a herb garden, the tactile sensation of a 
cold, exposed aggregate bench seat versus that of 
a Chippendale end table, and the taste in the air 
of salt-water spray instead of the rancid smell of 
refineries or paper mills. Each interaction reinforces value-laden meanings, reinstates personal 
and social values, and reaffirms people’s mutually agreed upon use of the signs and symbols as 
media of communication.
It was that she [Ethel Merman] 
filled the theater….from the 
back of the house to back of the 
off stage area, ceiling to floor, 
row, by row…On film…she 
nailed down her spot, feet firmly 
planted in what would become 
a familiar stance in which she 
bent her elbows, held her arms 
straight out in front of her, and 
rocked them backwards, elbows 
going up, then back down, 
and then arms forward again. 
Merman rocked.
(Basinger, 2019, 190)
The expressive characteristics of design fundamentals such as points, lines, planes, and volumes 
rely on our routinely (re)creating combinations of 
signs with which we identify, in which we find 
meaning, and through which we maintain a sense 
of position, or orientation, in our personal lives 
and heritage (Norberg-Schulz, 1985; 1980). The 
identifiable expressions of meaning-full places, 
memorable places, are anything but a hodgepodge collection of landscape features, building 
components, and interior furnishings and finishes 
(Conron, 2000). Rarely can a   random selection 
of furnishings be gathered together to make an 
interior or exterior space meaningful to people 
(Alexander, 1977; 1979). Randomness is not 
part of a good design process. The selection and 
organization of meaningful design features are 
outgrowths of people-place-activity contexts. 
Designed environments identified as meaningful by their users exhibit the difference between 
a designer knowing a language and being able 
to eloquently “articulate” it. Individual visual or 
39
audio signs, scents, and tactile sensations, identified with particular places and times, people and 
events, are what geographers refer to as bundles 
(Hagerstrand, 1970). A bundle might be all the 
shapes, materials, objects, and odors or aromas 
associated with a lakeside versus ocean-side 
marina, tennis courts versus horseshoe pits, or a 
public skating venue versus an amusement park. 
Within Tier 1 of The Analogy, that of Reading 
and Writing, the collection of referential items 
associated with particular activities, occupations, or areas of study is more often than not 
governed by specialized languages, shapes, and 
forms associated with those activities, functions, and topics. The specialized vocabularies of 
sailing or racquetball, cooking or woodworking, 
express the nuances of certain situations in the 
same way a person’s particular body motions 
display a “command or reserve of expressive 
techniques; repertoire: a dancer’s vocabulary of 
movement” (Morris, 1970, 1434). When you 
think about them, the specialized words and 
phrases associated with particular settings and 
activities also refer to identifiable characteristic 
spaces; the makeup of spaces associated with and 
supportive of particular activities is their syntax. 
Consider a people-friendly urban park. You’d 
expect the associated activity spaces to accommodate sitting, some for small groups and some 
for larger groups, sun and shade, framed views, 
maybe small tables or other surfaces for food, 
or chess or checkers, a separation from nearby 
roads, and so on.
Even with changes in our landscape-as-­
narrative vocabulary over time, one aspect remains  
as much the landscape as a medium of expression. Through that medium we seek three types 
of information. As we move about this or that 
landscape, we most immediately seek functional 
information. Two facts  support this conclusion: 
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs (1970) and people’s production and use of fundamental forms 
throughout history. Within the visual vocabulary of inhabited spaces, the fundamental functional messages have remained much the same 
over time: “Yes, I can get there from here.” “I 
will be safe going that way.” “Stop here.” “Look 
around, see where you are relative to where you 
want to go.” The linear nature of a path expresses 
direction and movement, motion and time. The 
two-dimensional qualities of an area denote 
gathering, orientation, and transition. The original gathering areas for carriages at Versailles and 
The Residence in Wertzberg, Germany are today 
gathering areas for cars. Receding or advancing, 
ascending or descending, flat surfaces remain 
steps the world around. Their associated acts of 
ascension and descension in turn express both 
practical and deeply moving meanings. Shapes, 
forms, and spatial sequences of expansion and 
compression express messages of movement 
associated with personal safety and the availability and access to food and shelter. Ching’s 
Architecture: Space, Form, and Order (1978) provides a great introduction to spatial forms and 
sequential experiences.
Figure 2.1 Wooden structures in Provincetown, 
Massachusetts. Photo by author.
Figure 2.2 Brick buildings in Back Bay, Boston, 
MA. Shutterstock Item ID: 7210093. Contributor: 
Jorge Salcedo.
40
The sequential flow of functional messages 
across a landscape, coupled with our collective 
associative memories of those messages, allows us 
daily to move about in relative personal safety. We 
identify the differences between lines and planes 
that distinguish gates from walls and fences, the 
textures and colors that delineate walkways from 
planting beds, and edges and dimensions of areas 
that distinguish bike paths from roads and automobile intersections. Imagine the accidents that 
would occur without our ability to read these collectively agreed upon distinctions associated with 
the lines and planes of roads and paths.
Messages of culture and heritage, while more 
powerful and longer lasting than functional messages come second to questions dealing with personal safety, welfare, and access to food and shelter. 
Functional messages come and go. Once safely past a 
point, let’s say a street corner, we are concerned with 
what is up ahead (overhead and underfoot) and then 
beyond that much more so than what is behind us. 
Messages associated with our social milieu, culture, 
and heritage are deeply engrained in our psyche. 
They are a part of us, of who we are, and as such are 
carried within us as we move about.
Our use of the visual signs in landscapes, buildings, and interiors is learned through a subtle socialization process. As we grow up, the organization 
of environmental signs develops into rules of 
behavior (Wood and Beck, 1994). A stop sign is a 
wonderful example. As a hexagonal piece of metal 
painted red with white letters spelling “STOP,” 
it is sign, plain and simple. It is a statement, an 
Figure 2.3  Chelan Crest, Washington State. 
Photo by author.
Figure 2.4 Centennial Trail, Spokane, WA. Photo 
by author.
Figure 2.5 Sidewalk mosaic gives neighborhood a sense of identity. Oberklee, Czechoslovakia. Photo by author.
Figure 2.6 Stop sign. Drawn by author.
41
international statement. As a symbol it expresses 
certain socially dictated parameters that are reinforced each time we heed the “order” to stop, 
knowing that if we don’t and get caught we will 
be punished. This is where the narrative form of 
The Analogy begins, with the distinction noted by 
Barthes: “it is ‘what it says’ that makes a statement 
a functional unit, not the manner in which it is 
said” (Sontag, 1994, 262).
Within an environment’s second layer of 
information we read cultural, social, and personal aspects of time and place. In this realm we 
daily experience the messages that reinforce who 
we are: American, Canadian, Creole, Japanese; 
student; baker, executive, wilderness guide. Like 
Russian Nesting Dolls our personal histories, our 
biographies, are nested within our family history, 
set within local, regional, and national histories. 
Realizing these bases of how we locate, or orient, 
ourselves within our society provides for meanings within the messages that express our personal 
and unique collective senses of being and belonging in a place and a time.
Landscape features, their materials, their finishes, and their particular sequential organizations of space are a few of the media that express 
our personalities, display our familial biographies, 
and exhibit the social and cultural histories of 
which we are a part. Our routine acts of dwelling 
establish functional messages set into the contexts 
of a place and time (Norberg-Schulz, 1980; Wood 
and Beck, 1994). The manner in which place-­
related information is imparted supports the 
interplay of Christian Norberg-Schulz’s concepts 
of orientation and of dwelling (1980; 1985) and 
is wonderfully explored in Yamin and Metheny’s 
Landscape Archaeology (1996). It is not difficult to 
find paths, courtyards, patios, and public spaces 
across cultures and countries that accommodate similar uses and user groups, e.g., outdoor 
markets (Ardalan and Bakhtiar, 1973). Even with 
the same dimensions the details delineating two 
paths, one in Ming dynasty China and the other 
in Victorian England, would communicate 
walking but with quite different distinguishing 
characteristics of each setting’s particular time 
and place. A wonderfully detailed review of 
such landscape features across history is found 
in Norman Newton’s Design on the Land: The 
Development of Landscape Architecture (1971). 
A more concise review of similar landscape features set in different cultural settings is found 
in William Mann’s Landscape Architecture: An 
Illustrated History in Timelines, Site Plans, and 
Biography (1993).
The second layer of landscape-as-narrative also 
tends to express (or call for) a place’s emotional 
content (Al-Husain et al. 2013; Light and Smith. 
2005) as drawn from our personal and collective 
memories. Then even deeper, there are our collective beliefs, values, and allegiances.
Within the third layer of message delivery 
(our collective unconscious) are embedded the 
deepest, most pervasive, essentials regarding the 
realities of life, nationalism, and afterlife. As  
the fundamental beliefs of our relationships with 
each other and with nature, “symbols (e.g. words 
and mental representations) get their meanings 
via correspondences to things in the external 
world…[as such] symbols that correspond to 
the external world are internal representations of 
external reality” (Lakoff, 1987, xii–xiii). Herein 
lie the basic fundamentals which color the ways 
we see the environment and interpret its features 
into the messages that form and inform our relationships and actions. Two wonderful summaries 
of this relationship with the world are found in 
the Wendy Faris’s Labyrinths of Language (1988), 
and in a collection of works by Roland Bathes, 
Figure 2.7 Matryoshka Russian (Nesting) 
Dolls. Courtesy, The Russian Store. https://
www.therussianstore.com/blog/the-history-of- 
nesting-dolls/. Last viewed February 1, 2022.
42
found in The Barthes Reader (Sontag, 1994). The 
existence of related literary works is echoed in 
the studies of cultural landscapes by such authors 
as Zube and Zube (1977), Rapoport (1982), 
Potteiger and Purinton (1998), and Spirn (1998).
An intriguing realization regarding the three 
layers of communication is that the layer of deep 
meanings is both the most subtle and yet the 
most enduring, e.g., iconic architecture embodying culture, nationalism, and people’s heritage: 
cross-cultural archetypes. Functional messages 
are the most blatant, immediate, and short lived 
in our mind as we move about a landscape. But, 
due to the immediacy of our concern for our personal safety as we move along a sidewalk or path 
from place to place earlier functional messages 
are quickly replaced by subsequent, immediate, 
upcoming functional messages. The messages 
making up a functional narrative are quite transitory. The secondary messages of the socio-cultural 
realm take time to be identified and interpreted 
(Potteiger and Purinton, 1998). Over time our 
initial recognition of a door as a door evolves 
into recognitions of a New England Colonial 
door versus a Spanish American door versus a 
7th-­century cathedral door. Consider visiting a 
foreign country for the first time, or even a new 
part of your own country, after a while you begin 
to pick up bits of the environmental vocabulary 
with which you were not originally familiar. But, 
keep in mind, you did recognize the basics and 
differentiate between doorway and the wall in 
which it was set.
THE DUALITY OF 
COMMUNICATION
Our ability to read narratives in built environments involves an interplay of two aspects of 
communication: the structural aspects typically 
associated with linguistics and the interactive 
aspects of dialogue that are more the study of 
social theorists. Structuralism looks at human 
culture, what people do, think, perceive, and feel, 
as being organized and given habitual form, by 
larger overarching systems or structures (Johnston 
et al., 1981, 329–330; also Wikipedia, 2016). 
The repetitive nature of our interactions with 
particular spaces in given contexts structures how 
we come to read, and interpret landscape messages, and texts. Among the social theories that 
best support this argument is Anthony Giddens’s 
structuration theory (Giddens, 1984). Our interaction with environments that we come to read 
is through a dialectic. Each time we identify and 
interpret, or read, a message “correctly” and act 
accordingly we reinforce that message and the 
signs and symbols from which it emerged. A 
pathway says “walk this way.” That dialectic, the 
simultaneous back-and-forth messages, can also 
call into play our need to make changes to the 
walkway if we don’t quite understand what the 
designer had intended. This is the back and forth 
that makes a discussion between us and the environment we are traversing. The repetition of such 
a dialectic is the living development of a social 
structure that says and is agreed upon by those 
who carry it out, in this case “Walk this Way,” and 
I am not referring to a Monty Python skit.
Whether in oral or written forms of communication or landscapes, messages are expressed in 
and through their parts. The sequential nature of 
the parts that come together over space and time 
as a story requires the developmental continuity 
provided by an appropriate and related (to the 
story’s theme) structure. An example is the mythic 
hero’s story which is found in cultures around the 
world (Campbell, 1949; Vogler, 1992). The parts 
are what we will deal with shortly as the typology, 
first as parts of language and then as the related 
basic design elements of point, line, plane, volume, 
and sequence of volumes. Then we explore how 
the parts combine to provide the continuum of 
messages we call landscape narrative. The character of those building blocks as found in different 
places, and how they are physically organized 
guide our interactions with our environments. 
In considerably more detail, Anthony Giddens’s 
structuration theory argues that the speech act, or 
our interaction with our surroundings both form 
and inform our sense of place and who we are is 
not a sequential act but a simultaneous one, a dialectic. As a dialectic it happens as part of a larger 
continuum as you cross a plaza, approach your 
favorite taco truck, and walk around to a friend’s 
house to arrive at a backyard barbecue.
43
Each time we use a walkway our actions reinforce the linearity of the feature as it reinforces our 
understanding of and ability to move in a linear 
fashion. Our repetitious behavior also reinforces the 
social courtesy of “staying on the walkway” and off 
the grass. The fact that someone built the walkway 
displays a certain authority; to maintain it shows 
agreement with and support of that authority. To 
ignore a walkway’s request to stay on it and diagonally cut across a lawn is to disagree with the function, meaning, and authority associated with the 
walkway and the authority behind its construction. 
To violate the social rules surrounding the proper 
use of a walkway is to at least show contempt for 
accepted social practices if not out-and-out disregard for local authority. Yet when enough people 
speak, their authority gets expressed, e.g., University 
of Michigan’s “Daig” over many years became an 
acceptable way to “cut across” the open green.
We know the gathering nature of areas and the 
ascending and descending nature of diagonal features such as stairways and ramps. Our knowledge 
of such things is tacit, taken for granted. We know 
how to use language to interact with one another. 
Yet, if questioned, few of us can readily explain 
how we do it. Our tacit knowledge of the social 
rules of life allows us to move about in the contexts of our daily routines without being able to 
readily, and explicitly, talk about why we do what 
we do. Dennis Wood and Robert Beck (1994) 
do a great job of illuminating the socio-cultural 
roots underlying the social expectations in the 
organization of spaces and objects making up an 
American family’s living room.
Paraphrasing Giddens, regarding the use of landscapes, we daily reproduce the messages, meanings, 
and values associated with the elements of language 
through their use. “The repetitiveness of activities 
which are undertaken in like manner day after day 
is the material grounding of what I call the recursive nature of social life” (Giddens, 1984, xxiii). 
Habermas sees this recursive nature of social life 
as part of his communication theory, specifically 
the taken-for-granted rules which he calls validity 
claims. Whenever we are about to speak to someone 
we do so with certain expectations, or validity 
claims. Validity claims are presuppositions latent in 
our communicative interactions with others aimed 
at achieving at least a mutual understanding if not 
consensus. We expect that what is said is comprehensible (it is understood), that it is sincerely and 
honestly stated (it is truthful), that it is proper 
within the social rules structuring the situation (its 
normative; appropriate), and that it is true in fact 
(its propositional content is true). Satisfying the four 
validity claims constitutes Habermas’s “ideal speech 
situation” (Habermas, 1979, 62–65). Now, consider 
Figure 2.9 University of Michigan “Diag.” 
Courtesy Michigan Photography, University of 
Michigan.
Figure 2.8 Aerial photo of University of Michigan “Diag.” Courtesy Michigan Photography, 
University of Michigan.
44
applying the validity claims to landscape architectural design. If our built designs, no matter how 
attractive, are not comprehensible, sincere, proper 
to their social setting, and not misleading, is that a 
good design? Is it an ethical design? 
An image of an ideal 
environment [a blend of the 
typical objective standards of 
residential design and residents’ 
aspirations and values, or 
social space] theoretically 
subsumes aspirations about 
territoriality, accessibility to 
desired destinations, and ideal 
site character. Activity orbits 
(the spatial expression of social 
reference systems) contribute to 
and mold this image. Individuals 
establish affective relationships 
with particular urban places, 
routes, nodes through the spatial 
activity patterns generated by 
interaction with their social 
systems. Their expectations about 
residential area character are 
also influenced by the norms and 
values transmitted within this 
reference system.
(Buttimer, 1980, 30)
In his structuration theory, Giddens highlights the fact that the repetitive nature of our 
daily actions and uses is situated; we tend to carry 
out the same activities in the same locations day 
after day. Our daily actions, occurring in particular and interrelated locations, bring to light 
the serial nature of our expectations and actions 
across space and time. “Every individual is at 
once positioned in the flow of day-to-day life; in 
the life-span which is the duration of his or her 
existence…Finally, each person is positioned, in a 
‘multiple’ way, within social relations conferred by 
specific social identities” (Giddens, 1984, xxiv). 
Building on the works of Goffman (1963) and 
Garfinkel (1963), among others, Giddens sees 
the situated nature of routine actions not only 
related to locales and settings but also expanding 
over space and time to involve a “regionalization 
of encounters,” or what can be termed a regional 
identity (touring the fall colors of New England). 
Repetitive social activities contributing to “place” 
are also explored as activity orbits and their spatial 
profiles by Buttimer (1980). The repetitive nature 
by which we apply our practical knowledge, our 
ability to reflect as a means of monitoring our 
ongoing flow of life, and other social and psychological activities are more fully explored later 
when we deal with the second and third realms of 
message delivery. Here, we begin dealing with the 
structural and structuring aspects of The Analogy.
BASIC ATTRIBUTES OF THE 
TYPOLOGY
What is really happening...
which may be very conscious 
or may be felt only as a certain 
strangeness and unease, is a 
process quite central in the 
development of language when, 
in certain words, tones and 
rhythms, meanings are offered, 
felt for, tested, confirmed, 
asserted, qualified, changed. In 
some situations this is a very 
slow process indeed...in other 
situations the process can be 
rapid.
(Williams, 1983, 12)
45
Each tier of The Analogy, reading and writing, 
basic design, and landscape design, is introduced 
below in terms of the fundamental signs identified 
by our senses. The basic attributes of the fundamental signs are those associated with vision and 
hearing, or what we write and read and what we 
say and hear in the communication of messages. 
This is not to say that even more information isn’t 
communicated through non-words. Psychologists 
say that non-words such as sighs, gasps, yawns, and 
the like say a lot. We have all experienced the punctuation of a conversation with a sigh, a yawn, or a 
gasp. What was your reaction? What did it tell you 
about the other person? A Time Magazine article 
noted that computer analysis of micro-movements 
in people’s facial expressions may soon replace 
polygraph tests as a means of detecting whether 
someone is telling the truth or lying (Golden/
La Jolla, 1999). We also read people’s culturally 
learned behaviors: stance, posture, and gesture. 
Each of these message delivery systems is based on 
the identification of lines as edges, the shapes of the 
areas the edges delineate, the volumes the surface 
areas form, and the sequence of the volumes to 
which they give rise. Beyond the visual, our other 
senses also read the attributes of the objects and 
spaces that make up our designs. The movie and 
advertising industries employ this understanding 
of such aspects as shape, form, color, and sequence 
to say much more to our egos and vanity than any 
written text could possibly express (Ewen, 1976; 
Lynes, 1954). And yet, how many movies of people 
have you seen in cold winter scenes and their breath 
is not appearing as vapor?
Texts, cinema, the visual narratives in paintings, dance, opera, and the like carry us from 
message to message, impression to impression, 
and idea to idea. At a simplistic level, our interaction with words, motions, and sounds in the 
recognition of patterns that draw us into artists’ 
and authors’ stories is a form of wayfinding and 
route following. “Wayfinding initially takes 
place when a route is not previously known even 
though an origin and/or destination are known” 
(Golledge, 1999, 21). Our initial encounter with 
an environment occurs on the functional level of 
satisfying the need to get somewhere, safely and 
on time. Subsequent trips along the same route 
are what is called route following. When leaving 
on a previously traveled journey we experience an 
anticipation of particular time frames between 
points, curves, rates of speed, direction, and the 
like: expectations to be met. Route following, in 
subsequent trips, allows people to read more of 
the environment beyond the objective aspects of 
finding their way. People build an understanding 
of a place, they draw from or impart meaning 
upon, and reinforce the social and cultural contexts of which the route is a part (Buttimer, 1980). 
The nuances realized along a path traveled several 
times are similar to seeing the same movie, or 
reading the same book, a second, third, or fourth 
time. Previously meaningless or missed words, 
gestures, motions, objects, and sounds become 
evident and add to a deepening appreciation of 
the story in a book, play, movie, or orchestration.
As we consider the data each of our senses identifies, we begin to recognize that different types of 
information are interpreted through more than 
one sense. One good example is seen in the 1980s 
Maxell magazine advertisement. The power of the 
sounds recorded on Memorex tapes (Is it Live or 
is it Memorex?) is communicated visually with the 
listener’s hair and necktie being blown straight 
back away from the speakers and, in the television version of the ad, with his chair being pushed 
away from the speakers. Look to ads, to films, to 
gourmet meals, and to music and you quickly 
find ways the advertisement industry’s masters 
of persuasion play with our senses’ reading of the 
“This is for you; You need to buy this” messages 
(Ewen, 1976; Lynes, 1954). Recognizing how 
Figure 2.10 Signaling a cold season: warm 
breadth vaporizing in cold air. Shutterstock ID: 
717801571. Contributor: Robsonphoto.
46
various signals may be employed to communicate 
and reinforce a given message, as in the Memorex 
ad, enlarges the palette from which designers can 
author landscape narratives. Word search “Blown 
Away Man,” then ask yourself, in the old 1980s 
Memorex advertisement photo, how do you 
know the power of the sound waves is blowing 
the seated young man backward?
As I argue later, while much of landscape 
architectural design remains grounded in the 
visual world, it is the supplemental orchestration of our other senses that turns a good design 
into a superior design. Our awareness of a point 
in a landscape is enhanced or diminished with 
supplementary audio, olfactory, and tactile 
input associated with that point. An intersection 
between two roads is made more memorable by 
the presence of nearby olfactory landmarks like 
the aroma of fresh bread or fragrant flowering 
shrubs. The linear nature of a pathway is echoed 
in the sound of the material under foot and the 
rhythmic occurrence of scented herbs along the 
route. A common example of the use of supplemental audio messages is found with the rumble 
strip running parallel to the painted outer edges 
of highway lanes.
phoneme: one of the set of the 
smallest unit of speech that 
distinguish one utterance or word 
from another in a given language 
(Morris, 1970, 985). They are 
the smallest units that can form 
or change meanings, e.g. sit and 
sat.
Vocabulary: a shared body of 
words and meanings in our 
most general discussions...of the 
practices and institutions which 
we group as culture and society.
(Williams, 1983, 15)
The Analogy’s expressive foundation begins 
with the visual units we know as the 26 letters that 
comprise our alphabet. The visual signs’ aural- 
audio counterparts are phonemes, or the smallest 
units of sound capable of conveying a distinction 
such as the f in fat and the c in cat. From their 
socially accepted combinations come the syllables which have been combined and recombined 
through history to give us the sounds and symbols 
we use today considered the phonological building blocks of words (https://en.m.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Syllable).
If I may make a metaphorical leap, the phonemes in basic design are the qualities that characterize each particular media and in turn bring a 
particular character to a design’s expressive character: chalk’s texture; paint’s viscosity or sheen; 
paper’s tooth; graphite’s hardness, ink’s density; 
motion’s direction, rate, and rhythm; and sound’s 
timbre. The qualities of a particular media, when 
used to make a visual point, or dot, initiate the 
production of a message. It initiates the character 
of a statement, as chosen by the author, and sets 
up the expectations of what is yet to come that will 
reinforce the theme. Consider the resulting qualities of a 3B (very soft) lead pencil versus those 
of a very hard 3H lead pencil, who uses them, 
and the products associated with the people, and 
their messages. Yes, I realize few people use pencils 
anymore but you should try a couple different 
densities. A point made with a hard graphite, 
a soft charcoal, or oil paint isn’t yet a message. 
Still, such points can be considered statements, 
or hints of statements, yet to be enlarged upon. 
Taken in combination with the other appropriately selected design features they come together 
to build not just a statement but a statement of 
particular character. Then, in combination with 
other statements, the production builds into messages and then a narrative (Rubin, 1995; Sontag, 
1994, 257–258).
…no [structural] level on its own 
can produce meaning. A unit 
belonging to a particular level 
only takes on meaning if it can 
47
be integrated in a higher level; 
a phoneme, though perfectly 
discernable, means nothing in 
itself; it participates in meaning 
only when integrated in a word, 
and the word itself must be in 
turn integrated in a sentence.
(Sontag, 1994, 257–258)
Line Shapes as Line Metaphors:
Borderline personality  
  disorder                  Toe the line
Bottom line	
        Crossing the line
Lifeline		
        Take a hardline stance
Come into line	         Further down the line
Syllables, as a combining of consonants and 
vowels, are the divisions into which we break 
words. Each division must have a vowel. Keep 
in mind that the pauses between syllables do as 
much to provide recognizable distinctions as does 
the contrast between the pitch and frequency of 
the sounds, or the hue, size, and shape of the 
letters in the text. Someone, and I cannot remember who, once said that it is the pauses between 
the notes that make music.
When gathered in a particular order, visual 
and audio signals furnish particular ideas. 
Remember the STOP sign from earlier? Working 
to understand the dynamics behind our interpretation of the signals as units of meaning, both 
in their production and in their reception, is an 
exercise well spent in coming to understand the 
message content of designed environments. The 
basic attributes of materials we use as design 
vocabulary are the structural and chemical characteristics that make them up. It is one thing to 
know what the crystalline structure of a rock will 
allow in terms of shape, character, and finishes. 
It is another to know that rocks left loose, as a 
dry laid stone wall, act in a fluid manner heaving 
and settling with frost and hydraulic expansion 
and contraction. Such walls communicate not 
only very different messages than stone fixed in 
concrete, but also the very construction of the 
message, in the form of a dry-laid wall, which is 
dramatically different from that of one requiring 
mortar and a foundation. Different degrees of 
craftsmanship, different amounts of time needed 
to construct a product, contribute to differing, 
deep meanings. In addition, the materials themselves can denote regions, e.g., wood planking, 
brick, adobe, stucco.
A terrace…unless there is 
sufficient room to slope the earth 
at a stable angle, retaining walls 
will be needed to hold it back at 
the edges. These become much 
more difficult and expensive 
to construct as they get taller. 
The problems with…the cost of 
shifting earth usually impose very 
strict limitations on the widths of 
the terraces. The steeper the slope 
the narrower they get.
…simple earthen retaining walls 
can’t be made very tall, so they 
fit closely to the original form 
of the land…Different natural 
landforms provide opportunities 
for a variety of terraced 
compositions.
(Moore et al., 1988, 27)
Along a similar line of thought, the cellular 
structure of wood calls for its selection or placement as planks to anticipate cupping and checking, how they may be treated with oils and stains, 
and how they may best be used to take advantage of their load-bearing capacities. The elegance 
expressed in a grand entryway using fine inlaid 
woods is easily destroyed by poor finishes and 
poor craftsmanship – a poor understanding of the 
48
basic attributes of wood in differing contexts and 
climates. Good design is as much good site engineering as good narratives are an intimate knowledge of language and its meaning-full content.
Meanings associated with sounds, the silence 
between the sounds, and the order in which the 
sounds occur go beyond those that make up our 
spoken language. The most subtle, and sometimes not so subtle, forms of message delivery are 
important to the buying public. Auto, truck, and 
motorcycle manufactures not only know which 
phonemes the public most immediately accept, 
but they are also registering the rights to use particular words so other companies will not use them 
in the future. Imagine the Ford Bronco having 
been named the Bambi or Hummingbird. Say 
the three words: Bronco, Bambi, Hummingbird. 
Listen to the emphatic sound of the “B” in Bronco 
over the other two words.
An excellent introduction to 
how language shapes the way 
we think is Lera Boroditsky’s 
TED Talk.
(https://www.ted.com/talks/
lera_boroditsky_how_language_shapes_the_way_
we_think?rid=ZtfIml0pxUI3&utm_source=recommendation&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=explore&utm_term=watchNow)
As the simplest basic unit of the visual arts, 
a point quantitatively distinguishes itself from 
other points not only by its shape, color, and 
texture but also by its media’s qualities. Points 
may be in the shape of a star, a square, an oval, 
and more. Each calls attention to itself, yet, in 
combination, a point’s particular shape’s edging, 
hue, texture, and tone calls attention to a distinctively expressed character. Points defined with visually softened edges express traits different than 
those with well-defined, crisp edges. The body 
character of a dancer’s pause in a Fosse production 
is easily distinguished from that seen in a classical 
ballet. Our ability to associate (or project) personality traits on to shapes and forms is the basis of 
Figure 2.13 Different media produce varied 
visual messages: engineered precision to 
rustic character.
Figure 2.11 Warped footbridge planking plank. 
Photo by author.
Figure 2.12 Cellular structure of wood. Drawn 
by author.
49
Norton Juster’s love story entitled, The Dot and 
the Line (1963). Similarly, seeing a bright spot set 
in a darkened forest is special when that accent is a 
dogwood coming into Spring bloom, as opposed 
to a spark growing into a fire. The visual accent of 
the bright bloom of the dogwood, surrounded by 
darkness shouts, “It is spring, the birth of a new 
season.” Its accent in a darkened forest whispers 
amour.
A phonetic attribute of a point may also be in 
the point’s seeming absence. Consider an oasis 
versus a clearing in the woods – mass vs. void. 
Audio points can be as much the notes or words 
as the pauses in conversation and music. Pauses 
in sentences are usually used to emphasize importance. Placed before the response, “Yes, I love 
you,” rather than after the “Yes” speaks volumes. 
A momentary absence of sound due to a change 
in texture under foot or air temperature as you 
walk along a path modifies the primary experience. Visual, audio, tactile, and olfactory accents, 
focal points, inflections, and highlights may be 
masses or they may be voids. What is not there 
often communicates as much information as what 
is there. The absence of what is expected sets a 
place apart from other places of similar design 
function.
That depends where you want to 
get to.
How do I get to Broadway?….I 
want to get to the center of 
things.
(Dos Passos, 1953, 4)
Quinn was struck by the way 
Stillman had skirted around the 
edge of the territory, not once 
venturing into the center.
(Auster, 1990, 82)
Phonemes bring to language what the fundamental attributes of plants, soils, air, light, 
and water bring to landscape design, building 
materials bring to architecture, and lighting and 
finishes to interior design. Landscape architects 
select plants not only for their shape, not just for 
whether they are coniferous or deciduous, but also 
for whether or not their leaves are more green than 
yellow, more glossy than matte, more serrate than 
palmate, or of greater or lesser leaf density. We 
recognize, at least unconsciously, that this level of 
a material’s fundamental attributes introduces or 
supplements the character of a message and comes 
to support the thematic character associated with 
an evolving narrative. Consider a sugar maple in 
full leaf, in full fall color, or without any leaves 
at all. How the phonemes combine are what we 
know as syllables, the basic units of the words we 
use to communicate: dic-tion-ar-y, land-scape, 
ar-chi-tec-ture, in-te-ri-or de-sign. Behind those 
basic units is the tone in which they are expressed: 
tone of voice or font’s visual character.
The phonemes and syllables of landscape 
design call our attention to the attributes that give 
trees, shrubs, perennials, and annuals the overall 
identity we seek to employ in specific design and 
activity settings. An interesting aspect of plants 
as the primary medium of landscape architecture 
is that their attributes change over time as they 
mature. In a sense, the profession’s medium is 
both an asset and a liability. As a plant matures 
its leaf arrangement, surfaces, and shapes, branching structure and patterns, leaf density and flexibility in the crown, and structural aspects vary. 
The beech tree is a good example. Starting out 
with upright limbs, the beech tree matures into 
a form with massive drooping lower branches 
often resting on the ground. An older beech tree’s 
canopy comes to hide from sight what could be 
readily seen years earlier. As many plants mature 
they increasingly define spaces, often foreshortening views, and at times eliminating distant views 
all together. A private residence was deprived of a 
Figure 2.14 Expressive font characteristics.
50
view over downtown Baltimore and its harbor as 
the neighbor’s pine trees matured. In Washington, 
DC a historic estate, built in the 1800s, north of 
the Mall originally had a view over the city, the 
Mall, and the Capitol. A forested area downhill 
from the estate grew and eventually prevented any 
view of the Capital area. Historians and preservationists argued for years over whether to leave the 
trees (preservation) or cut them down and return 
the view (restoration). And to add to the character 
of a message imagine the difference in a single tree 
in a clearing or backyard when the tree is a conical 
pine versus a rounded or oval canopied deciduous 
tree. What might it express in each season?
Rather than just letters of the alphabet, I 
consider a word comparable to a point in basic 
design and a singular object in a landscape design, 
e.g., light pole, water fountain along a walkway, 
kiosk. The placement of a word, one word, on a 
blank piece of paper or computer screen initiates 
a cascade of events. Words are the basic design 
points of our language. Single words provide for 
our simplest statements. Used alone a word punctuates the quiet, typically stops a flow of thoughts, 
or calls attention to the speaker. In a landscape 
space, a lone object can arrest our movement, 
grab our attention, provide for a sense of here 
and there, and help orient us. Single words carry 
the phoneme’s initiation of a statement/message a 
step further. The si sound in “silence” in combination with the shortness of the word brings a subtle 
emphasis to the message that the qwa sound in 
“quiet” doesn’t.
In language, the evolution of a thought from a 
word to a series of words makes that linear feature 
we call a sentence and involves us in applying 
grammar and syntax: rules of message organization and context setting. In a similar fashion, in 
basic design, a point inscribes a line as it moves 
through space. In basic design we gather together 
design elements in response, or contradiction, 
to basic design principles (Wong, 1972; 1977). 
The number of principles vary across the art and 
design professions. Some designers say there are 
seven design principles, some say ten, some list 
even more. A few of the most frequently identified design principles include contrast, balance, 
emphasis, proportion, hierarchy, and repetition. 
Our selection and organization of the objects and 
spaces that make up landscapes, architecture, and 
interiors are guided by design principles. Some 
guiding design principles are practical in support 
of a place’s best and safest use. They guide a 
certain clarity of expression in landscape messages 
so users’ safety and welfare are protected. Some 
are aesthetically based, while others are derived 
from a culture’s historically established art theory 
and perceptual psychology (Arnheim, 1969; 
Kandinsky, 1979; Langer, 1967).
The selection and organization of expressive 
spaces and objects depend as much on a syllable, the unit of spoken language consisting of 
a vowel alone or with one or more consonants, 
as it does on the phonemes. In other words, in 
landscape design, the basic units contributing 
to the greater message do so based upon their 
sequencing and how they are supplemented and 
augmented, how landscape features are refined, 
and modified. While the phonemes may be 
considered the crystalline structure of granite or 
basalt, or the chemical composition of paint, the 
syllables are the more immediately sensed characteristics of each material: granite doesn’t look 
Figure 2.15 Mature Beech Tree, Manito Park, 
Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
51
like basalt or shale. Viscosity and texture help us 
differentiate between watercolors and oils as each 
expresses a different visual character and message 
quality. As the immediately discernible material 
qualities of things, syllables allow us to identify 
objects and spaces for what they are: cedar wood 
bench, exposed aggregate concrete bench, plastic 
molded bench. Knowing and applying particular 
material qualities to a design allows us to impart 
it with the attributes of particular character – to 
supplement or diminish the particular theme of 
a place. In writing or printing, the basic visual 
unit is a squiggle on a page: a letter or group of 
letters of the alphabet representing a syllable. This 
starting point to the construction of messages indicates that there are media that can be combined 
in ways that are identifiable in both the shape 
and the qualities expressing that shape. William 
Carlos Williams’ poem “Rain” (Williams, 1965, 
745–748) is an excellent example of shape and 
subject as one. Once the shapes are identified they 
are then interpreted as meaningful or meaningless. 
Please understand that I use “interpret” for the sake 
of simplicity. Our actual acts of interpretation are 
socially based and occur only during or after we 
have first recognized a greater context and then 
identified a particular image, object, or pattern set 
in its context (Evernden, 1992; Wolff, 1981).
The tranquility of ponds and reflectivity of 
puddles is seen in rain that falls on level ground. 
Rain that falls in the hills or mountains “expresses” 
a forceful vitality and energy in the moving linear 
forms of creeks, streams, and rivers. Eastern 
Maryland’s mostly flat coastal Eastern Shore is 
characterized by ponds and when it rains puddles. 
The western part of Maryland, they would say 
mountainous side of the state, is characterized by 
flowing water, streams, creeks, and falls.
A further building of a narrative’s initial 
message qualities is provided by sentences. Like 
lines, sentences as linear units impart considerably more meaning than their basic units: the 
single word or point. As sentences multiply, their 
messages expand and open a developmental (progressive) logic to what is being communicated. 
Both their physical character (straight, curved, 
zigzag, vertical) and their message content are 
linear. Sentences are additive in their leading the 
reader/user to the author’s predetermined location 
and event, or along a sequence of possible conclusions. The progressive development of messages 
calls into play a recognition of social conventions 
similar to those found in “playing a game with 
agreed upon pieces and rules and procedures” 
(Moore at al., 1988, 23; also Wittgenstein, 1958, 
1960). While there may be a number of messages 
to be communicated, once begun the available potential content and form of what is to be 
delivered is increasingly narrowed (see Chatman’s 
“contingency,” 1980, 45–48). An author uses this 
logic of increasingly reduced choices to lead the 
“So my life is spent
                           to keep out
love
with which
she rains upon
                       the world
of spring
                  drips
so spreads
                   the words
far apart to let in
                        her love
And running in between
the drops
                 the rain
is a kind physician
                           the rain
of her thoughts over
the ocean
                   every
where
             walking with
invisible swift feet
over
             the helpless
                          waves--”
Figure 2.16 Excerpt of lines 36–60 from William 
Carlos Williams poem, Rain (1965, 745–748), 
displays his effort to visualize rain.
52
reader toward or away from particular conclusions (Rubin’s “cues,” 1995). In matters of public 
safety and security the unfolding messages must 
be blatant and be what the general public would 
expect in the message sequence and emerging 
anticipated conclusion. “Do this.” Do that.” “Yes, 
you’ll get from here to there safely.” In matters 
of humor, a playfulness is set up between what is 
expected and what is found. This same interplay, 
done with greater seriousness, can give way to a 
sense of mystery or drama.
Once a label (professor, 
housewife, Black, chair, 
automobile, laxative) has 
been applied, people are much 
less likely to notice the actual 
qualities or attributes of that 
which is labeled. 
(Adams, 1976, 81)
We shall not cease from 
exploration/ And the end of all 
our exploring/ Will be to arrive 
where we started/ And know the 
place for the first time.
(Eliot, 1963, 208)
Being familiar with the fundamental characteristics of various media used in a design (troweled vs. 
brushed concrete vs. gravel) heightens a designer’s 
ability to orchestrate music for people’s eyes and 
compose beauty for people’s ears. Coming to know 
the potential nuances of basic design and landscape 
design is helped by James Adams’s Conceptual 
Blockbusting (1976). Adams identifies numerous 
conceptual blocks that limit how we see and think 
about the world. He identifies the blocks as perceptual, cultural, environmental, emotional, intellectual, and expressive. One way he suggests breaking 
through these blocks he calls attribute listing (80–
82). His introduction of attribute listing helps us 
break our tendency to settle for believing we know 
something just because we’ve accepted its label. He 
introduces us to ways to look beyond the immediate and below the surficial. Adams’ exercise of 
attribute listing takes to heart Gregory Bateson’s 
adage that “the map is not the territory.” By asking 
us to list a particular object’s attributes we come 
to know it better for what it is or, to paraphrase a 
cereal commercial, “to come to know it again for 
the very first time.”
An exploration of the perceptions made by each 
of our senses carries our understanding of messaging beyond the visual realm of perception typically 
associated with design. Bricks are literally the building blocks of many things in the landscape. No one 
could guess the number of times bricks have been 
specified in projects throughout history. Yet, I have 
never heard designers discuss bricks as Adams asks 
us to: “list some of the attributes of a brick. Some 
of them are: weight, color, rectangularity (sharp 
edges, flat faces), porosity, strength, roughness, the 
capacity to store and conduct heat, poor capacity to 
conduct electricity, [and] hardness” (Adams, 1976, 
81). He then asks us to consider the potential uses 
of bricks based upon each attribute. Yes, some of 
the answers he shares are strange, but a bunch of 
the answers do redirect our thinking to uses in the 
landscape that are both appropriate and unique. If 
we take this approach with various landscape materials and plants, then we acquire not only an understanding of the materials themselves but also the 
rarely considered major and minor message-delivery 
capabilities of those materials.
Exploration of The Analogy’s typological units 
began here with the point and its contribution 
to line(s). In the upcoming chapters a little more 
detail given regarding points and lines sets the 
stage for a progression through planes, volumes, 
and sequences of volumes. Each unit is looked at 
(1) as related to language, (2) as related to landscape design, and (3) as building blocks to a landscape narrative. At this point you have been asked 
to consider the idea that landscape features express 
information, that information combines across 
space and through time to express a text, and set 
in the greater contexts of history and culture the 
texts can be authored and read as narratives.
3
Points
T
he Analogy’s typology helps us understand 
the expressive capabilities of the primary 
medium of our profession, the landscape. In 
an effort to reinforce that foundation we start an 
in-depth review here of the fundamental component parts that make up our design palette. 
Our exploration of point, as both a design 
element and a unit of narrative, is based on two 
premises. First, points are read by each of our five 
senses, and second, points, as well as the other 
design elements of line, plane, and volume, are 
conceptual as well as actual entities, e.g., Lynch’s 
“landmarks” (1960, 78–83).
“A friend in Seattle said of Mount Rainier, ‘It 
is my reference point, my compass bearing. Even 
on a cloudy day, I know it is there. Portlanders 
feel the same way about Mount Hood” (Ewert, 
1999, 7). Actual points, as physically unique features, stand out from their surroundings. This 
contrast can be seen in a point’s relative size – 
typically small within its surrounding referential 
area or its shape relative to its setting, such as the 
Washington Monument. I say it that way because 
of the difference between a dot on a page and 
the three-dimensional Washington Monument 
on the Mall in the District of Columbia. Roland 
Barthes provides a fascinating analysis of another 
landmark, the Eiffel Tower: 
Figure 3.1 Washington Monument, Washington, 
DC. Photo by author.
Figure 3.2 Dynamics associated with a point (Ching, 1978, 20). Courtesy John Wiley & Sons.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-4
55
56
…all this night, too, [the Eiffel 
Tower] will be there, connecting 
me above Paris to each of my 
friends that I know are seeing 
it: with it we all comprise a 
shifting figure of which it is the 
steady center…the only blind 
point of the total optical system 
of which it is the center and 
Paris the circumference.
(Barthes, 1982, 236–237)
Both landmarks can be considered points within 
their respective settings. Both “standout” from 
their surroundings. As a result, both draw attention to themselves or we could say “gather our 
attention to them.” They are reference points, 
moments around which people may orient themselves. “The [Eiffel] Tower attracts meaning, the 
way a lightning rod attracts thunderbolts…” 
(Barthes, 1979, 5).
Contrast is a point’s primary identifying 
feature: a momentary lone note heard over a 
harmony, a yellow garnish set atop a bowl of gazpacho, a splash of sherbet to cleanse the palette 
between courses, the sudden feeling of gravel at a 
special location in a garden, or the smell of freshly 
baked breads at a particular location in a city. 
These landmark moments often become memories. In the future they trigger memories, and the 
marker points along a journey.
Points do not occur in isolation. Whether on 
the written page, in a two-dimensional design, 
or as part of a landscape or building, points are 
points due to their relation to their surroundings. Single letters of the alphabet or Christopher 
Alexander’s elementary patterns occur in relation 
to their contexts. “Each pattern can exist in the 
world, only to the extent that it is supported by 
other patterns” (Alexander, 1977, xiii). Contexts 
may be little more than the edge of a page or 
the orientation of the area in which the point is 
located. While a point may remain physically the 
same within itself, set within a variety of different contexts its implications and meanings can 
vary. The same dot produced by a pencil may be 
a decimal point separating dollars and cents or a 
period at the end of a sentence or it may be an 
intellectual concept, as in the animated film The 
Point. Points may be personified expressions of 
worldviews such as those of the characters found 
in Flatland (Abbott, 1991) or personal relationships between The Dot and the Line (Juster, 1963).
Once upon a time there was 
a sensible straight line who 
was hopelessly in love with a 
dot. “You’re the beginning and 
the end, the hub, the core and 
the quintessence,” he told her 
tenderly, but the frivolous dot 
wasn’t a bit interested.
(Juster, 1963)
Figures 3.3.1–3.3.3 We take up points in space: limited personal space, midrange social space, 
and lots of public space.
57
Circular masses and circular voids also provide 
a spectrum of meanings and uses: a horizontal 
traffic circle or rotary, a vertical moon gate or 
bank safe’s door, a spherical rotunda or dome. The 
embedded nature of a point, its strictly physical 
quality, is inescapable. Chameleon-like, any given 
point can maintain its identity as a point while 
its purpose is adapted to and by its surroundings. 
This is not to say they change, in and of themselves. A moon gate remains static yet shifts in 
early morning versus mid-day or diffused evening 
light. It remains a contrast to its shifting surroundings through the day and into the evening. 
The variety of uses and meanings are what the 
landscape users bring with them, the activities 
that they are looking to find and accommodate in 
meeting their expectations.
Once you decide to go to a particular place 
you conjure up both conscious and subconscious, 
context-driven expectations of what you will 
encounter along the way and when you arrive. 
The landscape reader-participant brings an aspect 
of context with him- or herself. Sitting in your 
favorite living room comfy chair is one context; 
the context you bring with you lies in the fact that 
the book you’re about to read is a romance novel. 
Knowing that colors how you read each word. 
Considering context, the designer-as-author can 
anticipate and use the participant’s expectations 
for coming to a particular place and give structure to what is seen, heard, felt, and smelled. 
One’s movement through such places is helped 
by occasional points of pause and reorientation. 
The users’ reasons for going to a particular kind 
of space greatly contribute to the way the orchestration of spaces and things in that space are read. 
By understanding the reader-user(s) the designer 
can better identify their expectations and choreograph their directions, movements, and pauses.
A point’s ability to communicate information 
in the form of visuals, sounds, scents, textures, 
and tastes, whether in written or spoken language, 
a piece of art or a landscape, calls into play five 
criteria. They are the fundamentals of (1) space 
and (2) time, (3) the interplay of repetition and 
(4) memory as played out in our oral traditions 
(Rubin, 1995), and (5) the socio-cultural rules 
we live by (Wood and Beck, 1994). These criteria 
introduce the designer-author to the taken-forgranted contexts of many people’s personal routines as daily and weekly cycles or, as Buttimer 
refers to them, activity space profiles (Buttimer, 
1980, 29–40).
For now, we will consider the power of points 
as organizers of space and time. Alexander recognizes the sequential nature of working through 
the patterns making up his Pattern Language 
(1977), “moving always from the ones which 
create structures, to the ones which embellish 
those structures, and then to those which embellish the embellishments...” (Alexander, 1977, 
xviii). Alexander’s recognition of the sequential 
ordering of patterns is both an application and 
an exploration of the idea of context. He realizes 
the connectivity of individual structures to structural systems, the larger systems of which they 
Figure 3.4 Moongate Garden, Smithsonian, 
Washington, DC. Photo by author.
Figure 3.5 Georgetown neighborhood, Washington, DC. Photo by author.
58
are a part, and the continuity across the details 
that hold them all together as identifiable entities. 
The shops snuggled in among the townhouses of 
Georgetown, in the District of Columbia, fit in 
their respective neighborhoods. As contrasting 
points dotted about the densely packed urban residential area, the shops provide residents with sustenance and news, desserts, and coffee. They also 
provide local people with the kinds of landmarks 
that allow them to easily give visitors directions 
to other parts of town. While their architectural 
lines and facades clearly denote them as other 
than residences, they are clearly an integral part 
of the greater fabric of the neighborhood. As a 
pedestrian neighborhood, the connection being 
made between individual structures and their 
larger structural systems is one of fit.
The shops dotted about Georgetown’s neighborhoods provide centers from which radiate 
traffic. They provide orientation points that 
give an area its distinctive patterns of landscape 
and life, more so than if the neighborhood 
was a homogeneous suburban land use area of 
­single-family residences.
THE POWER OF THE POINT
Thus we look upon the 
geometric point [a period 
ending a sentence] as the 
ultimate and most singular 
union of silence and speech…
In the flow of speech, the point 
symbolizes interruption…at 
the same time it forms a bridge 
from one existence to another.
(Kandinsky, 1979, 25)
Gardens, like buildings, can 
engage a site in several different 
ways. One way is for the 
garden to stake a claim over the 
site, just as a perfectly formed, 
symmetrical Greek temple 
takes a spiritual control of the 
whole landscape that it surveys. 
Circles of trees on hilltops, 
found in the English landscape 
since King Arthur and Merlin, 
similarly appropriate their 
surroundings.
(Moore et al., 1988, 22)
As a contrast to their surroundings, points are 
energy gatherers. They have power. They allow 
us to orient ourselves as they introduce a sense of 
here and there. They accent or punctuate a progression or pathway. What is unique about this 
power is that as a mathematical entity points do 
not actually exist; they have no length or breadth. 
Mathematically and philosophically, they do not 
occupy space – that other intangible medium of 
design. Ignoring the mathematical definition, 
designers work as though points in the landscape, 
in architecture, and in interiors do have length, 
breadth, and depth; as though they do exist. 
Points are places to be gathered in, stopped on, 
turned around on, seen as a beginning or end, or 
passed by. As spaces, points get a lot of a designer’s attention, much to the dismay, I’m sure, of 
Figure 3.6 Philadelphia mixed-use neighborhood similar to Georgetown and others: 
Elfreth’s Alley, Philadelphia, PA; Beacon Hill, 
Boston, MA; French Quarter, New Orleans, LA. 
Photo by author.
59
philosophers (Moore et al., 1988, 26). Carried to 
its humorously logical conclusion, the power of 
a point as an existing, nonexistent energy gatherer is found in Italo Calvino’s (1968) intriguing 
exploration of the Big Bang. He introduces that 
point of inception as that
moment when all the universe’s 
matter was concentrated in a 
single point, before it began to 
expand in space.
Naturally, we were all there...
where else could we have been? 
Nobody knew then that there 
could be space. Or time either: 
what use did we have for time, 
packed in there like sardines?
I say ‘packed like sardines, 
‘using a literary image: in 
reality there wasn’t even space 
to pack us into. Every point 
of each of us coincided with 
every point of each of the others 
in a single point, which was 
where we all were. In fact, 
we didn’t even bother one 
another, except for personality 
differences, because when space 
doesn’t exist, having somebody 
unpleasant like Mr. Pber t Pber 
d underfoot all the time is the 
most irritating thing.
(Calvino, 1968, 43)
Points, landmarks, and exclamations mark and 
demarcate locations in space and time. As orientation points they denote location, places of 
transition along a journey, whether that journey 
involves walking or driving, a five-course meal, a 
symphony or aria, or that moment everyone gets 
terrified in a ghost story heard around a campfire. 
Each of these event points is a moment of differentiation in someone’s daily life.
Other specific points also help us measure our 
progress along spatial and temporal continuums: 
birthdays, rest areas or unique landscapes, a high 
vista or a narrow gorge. While the campfire, waterfall, or clock tower are themselves points located in 
space along the duration of an errand, a day, a week, 
year, or lifetime, people’s journeys through each 
day typically comprise smaller, less monumental, points: coffee shop, corner bus stop, florist, 
vest-pocket park, cleaners. That special meal may 
be a high point in your social calendar, while the 
serving of Prairie Oysters or Baked Alaska may be 
the bright spot in the meal. Macro- and micropoints are found in the landscape as well. Walden 
Pond is a special location, along the path around 
the pond the site of Thoreau’s hut is an equally 
special spot. At both geographic scales, that of 
the pond and its surrounding ecology and that 
of the hut’s site, as points they exhibit gathering 
power. Additionally, people intellectually gather 
at Thoreau’s pond and hut as they read Walden. 
People congregate or pivot about points while 
remaining oriented: a small bowl with trickling 
water at a juncture of two paths or place of reflection, an ancient Beech tree and its shaded hiding 
places, a gateway or stairway connecting two 
gardens.
Figure 3.7 A campfire as a gathering point. 
Shutterstock ID: 59945146. Contributor: Alexander Ishchenko.
60
Roland Barthes captures the essence of a point, 
in this case a vertical point in the form of the Eiffel 
Tower, and its ability to contribute to our sense of 
orientation in both space and time. In his musing on 
the panoramic vision afforded a tourist by the elevation of the Tower’s observation deck, Barthes notes:
….the bird’s-eye view, which 
each visitor to the Tower can 
assume in an instant for his 
own, gives us the world to 
read and not only to perceive; 
this is why it corresponds to 
a new sensibility of vision…
the bird’s-eye view…permits 
us to transcend sensation and 
to see things in their [greater] 
structure…in Paris spread out 
beneath him, he spontaneously 
distinguishes separate – because 
known – points – and yet 
does not stop linking them, 
perceiving them within a great 
functional space; in short, he 
separates and groups; Paris 
offers itself to him as an object 
virtually prepared…
(Barthes, 1982, 242–43)
In much the same way in which Barthes communicates his realizations, in a sequential additive manner 
afforded by written text, so too he says that the 
meaningful realizations of a tourist are sequentially 
built during a visit to the Tower. Among the tourists’ 
experiences, Barthes argues, is the realization of a 
landmark, as a point, in its form as a vertical feature 
and as one with an inside and outside. The Tower 
gathers to it people, a meaning of place, a sense of 
Parisian identity, and a dynamic of here/there and 
then/now that gives people a sense of orientation.
…being enclosed is therefore a 
function of the rite [of coming 
to know Paris]. Here, too, the 
Tower is a paradoxical object: 
one cannot be shut up within 
it since what defines the Tower 
is its longilineal form and its 
open structure: How can you be 
enclosed within emptiness, how 
can you visit a line?
(Barthes, 1982, 248)
The gathering power of points in the landscape is not 
new. Throughout history the tree gathered to it philosophers, religious leaders, and the myths of many 
cultures. Buddha rested under a tree to gain both 
physical and spiritual nourishment. Many peoples 
have seen the tree as an axis mundi that connects the 
three worlds, with its roots in the underworld, its 
trunk as part of the earth as we are, and its branches 
in the heavens. Basil Johnson speaks to Ojibwa ceremonies and a central post connecting mother earth 
and father sky (1982, 116–117).
Lewis and Clark found the Great Plains and 
Plateau Indians using the lodgepole pine to support 
their teepees and sweat lodges. The poles supported 
the shelters of home and the place of spiritual 
renewal. As the main support of the usually circular teepee or Sweat Lodge, their circling around 
it emphasized the axis mundi around which all of 
life revolved. The use of many of the lodgepole’s 
byproducts likely added to the conceived power of 
this pole to renew, purify, and sustain life. Totem 
poles are another form of center point around 
which the spaces of life gathered and were seemingly protected while the spirits oversaw a tribe’s 
well-being. Recently in popular media we were 
introduced to The Tree of Souls around which the 
Na’vi gathered in the film Avatar.
Nabokov and Easton’s Native American 
Architecture (1989) provides wonderful examples 
of what I refer to as explicit (actual) and implicit 
(inferred) features that connected, located, and 
oriented Native American peoples in their actual 
61
and spirit worlds. Most, if not all, Native American 
tribes had some form of central ceremonial feature 
in their wigwams, lodges, tipis, and homes. Some 
were explicit, actual features such as that found 
in “over twenty Plains tribes built temporary Sun 
Dance lodges” in which “the center pieces were 
a forked cottonwood tree” (168). During Haida 
winter ceremonies a pole that extended through the 
smoke hole was planted in the house. “This ‘cosmic 
tree’ was climbed by the shaman to symbolize his 
access to the sky world, with its spirits and powers” 
(38). The Hadasta earth lodge had “a four post 
and beam structure that provided internal support 
for the rafters at the central smoke hole” (127). 
Additional implied features visually connected the 
fire pit to central smoke hole or, working in the 
other direction, a shaft of sunlight would connect 
the sky world and inhabitants’ structure’s interior. 
Other somewhat implied vertical central features 
stood a few feet tall and aligned with the smoke hole, 
and by association connected the underworld and 
sky/cosmos. The Mandan’s village center was designated by a tight circular column of “woven willow 
rods symbolizing the high-water mark of the Great 
Flood” (140).
Early Native Americans regularly experienced 
the power of gathering places. The locations of many 
waterfalls throughout the country were the annual 
spring gathering points of Native Americans. In 
early spring, fish, returning upstream to spawn, 
were slowed, or stopped at the base of many waterfalls. Stories say that even warring nations set aside 
their differences and lived in relative harmony as 
they gathered each spring to fish salmon on the 
Spokane River and alewife on the Connecticut and 
Charles Rivers of Massachusetts. In Turners Falls, 
Massachusetts, the annual spring feasting occurred 
over so many years that the soil below the falls 
is said to be saturated in fish oil and bones to a 
depth of 40′. The power of these annual springtime 
places and their related gathering events provided 
physiological nourishment, spiritual renewal, and 
the turning point from long winter to plentiful 
summer. The points were temporary, yet annually 
repeated, moments along cyclical journeys.
Maryland’s State Tree in Wye Mills, MD was 
more than 100 feet high and had a branch spread of 
165 feet. The marker in front of the Wye Oak said:
 The Wye Oak. The largest 
White Oak in the United 
States. Estimated to be 400 
years old (1940). The Wye 
Oak was believed to be over 
460 years old at the time of 
its destruction during a severe 
thunderstorm on June 6, 2002.
(Wikipedia https://
en.wikipedia. 
org/wiki/Wye_Oak)
Points as objects are explicit. They are easily recognized. They denote such generic meanings 
as initiation, transition, and terminus of ideas, 
Figure 3.8 Eiffel Tower, Paris, France. Shutterstock ID 256252072. Contributor: S-F.
62
movement in a particular direction, and relations with a place. As spaces, points are, in and 
of themselves, implicit. They connote many 
of the same messages found in their associated 
object forms, but those messages come more 
through the activities that they allow to happen 
in them than the objects that surround them. A 
bench denotes a place of rest and the opportunity for relaxation, reorientation, or entertainment in people watching. Set in the linear space 
of a walkway, rather than in an area to the side 
of it, the message of “rest” and the experience of 
renewal are diminished. Explicit landmarks such 
as tall sculptural structures, dominant trees, clock 
towers, and buildings generally call for adjacent 
and surrounding gathering spaces. The association of vertical point with horizontal area is the 
knowledge we take for granted as we move toward 
such objects. Village church spires, seen from a 
distance and preceding your arrival at the village, 
foretold of a public space, typically a market area. 
Together they suggested both spiritual and nutritional sustenance. The Eiffel Tower and the One 
World Trade Center work as large-scale orientation points in the same way the Wye Oak did as a 
historical landmark drawing people to itself.
One of the most universal of 
human instincts is to raise a 
landmark from the surface of 
the earth. This gives a center 
to a fragment of the world...
Landmarks may serve to 
announce a destination, to create 
the promise of arrival in a place 
of human habitation...Instead 
of marking a center, a landmark 
may also be used to define a 
boundary.
(Moore et al., 1988, 30)
Explicit signals call us to gather in their associated spaces: market towers and church steeples. The cathedrals of Chartres and Mont Ste. 
Michael are each easily seen from 8 to 10 miles 
distance. Each stands well above the surrounding farm fields from which peasants came for 
protection, knowledge, spiritual renewal and 
to pay their tithe. Places of congregation were, 
Figure 3.9 Points within points; Duncan 
Garden, Manito Park, Spokane, WA. Photo by 
author.
Figure 3.10 Chartres Cathedral, France. Shutterstock ID: 1985033804 France. Contributor: 
Didier Foto.
Figure 3.11 Mont Saint-Michel, Normandy. 
Shutterstock ID: 1471944950. Contributor, Ilya 
Shimanskiy.
63
and still are, places of shelter, nourishment, and 
growth through social interaction. Vertical points 
are intriguing in their association with the fundamental aspects of Maslow’s hierarchy (1970): 
shelter, food, and social interaction. These are 
aspects of the functional messages associated with 
points. The narrative aspect of vertical points in 
regard to deeper social and symbolic meanings is 
explored below. For now, it is important to begin 
to recognize the functional messages associated 
with vertical points.
Often a point as an object works in tandem with 
a point as a space, or void: the market square and 
church steeple. One announces the other. Again, we 
are reminded that points have the power to gather 
people’s attention, if not the people themselves, 
and their energy. So, by broadcasting its presence, 
the vertical allows the other to be utilized by those 
gathering in or by it. A church steeple at the end 
of a marketplace is as much the marketplace as is 
the space accommodating the vendors, the words 
and gestures used in bartering, and the aromas and 
scents of the goods being hawked. A public square 
or marketplace becomes associated with the vertical 
commercial or religious structure. The vertical object 
announcing the horizontal space and the horizontal 
space are interdependent. At the edge of a garden, or 
the approach to an estate, a gate is as much the arrival 
point as a gateway is a stage on which the experience 
of arrival is felt. In fact, we often lose sight of the fact 
that what isn’t there (gateway, doorway) is frequently 
as important as what is there (gate, door). When we 
refer to a gate, is it the gate or the gateway to which 
we refer? Is it the space or the objects defining the 
space that are important? The same questions can be 
applied to a window (Norberg-Schulz, 1980, 8); is 
it the wall or the opening in the wall that affords us 
views connecting interior and exterior?
The Utility of Not Being Thirty 
spokes unite around the nave; 
From their not-being (loss of 
their identity)Arises the utility 
of the wheel. Mold clay into 
a vessel; From its not-being 
(in the vessel’s hollow) Arises 
the utility of the vessel. Cut 
out doors and windows in the 
house (wall), From their notbeing (empty space) arises the 
utility of the house. Therefore 
by the existence of things we 
profit And by the non-existence 
of things we are served
(Lao Tzu, 1948, 87)
In 1889, Camillo Sitte observed the interplay of 
masses and voids making up public spaces. In his 
pivotal work The Art of Building Cities: City Building 
According to Its Artistic Fundamentals, he identified 
and substantiated numerous urban design principles 
from his personal observations of ancient European 
urban spaces. He determined the “ancient,” as 
opposed to the modern, rationale for locating fountains and statues in public spaces was to place them 
where people didn’t walk. While such objects signaled gathering places, “this explains why fountains 
and monuments are not located at places of intense 
traffic use, nor at the center of public places, nor on 
the axis of a monumental portal, but by preference 
to the side” (1945, 14).
If the building of a fountain 
were desired, it obviously 
would not be located on a 
thoroughfare, but rather on 
one of the island-like plots 
separated from the traffic…
This also explains why in each 
city and each public space the 
arrangement of the monuments 
is different, for in each case 
streets open onto the square 
differently; traffic follows a 
64
different direction and leaves 
other points free.
(Sitte, 1945, 14).
Almost 100 years after Sitte’s 
observations Edmund Bacon 
notes our contemporary 
ignorance of space as a 
preoccupation of designers 
that flies in the face of Sitte’s 
realization of fountains 
placement: The basic ingredient 
of architectural design consists of 
two elements, mass and space. 
The essence of design is the 
interrelation between the two. 
In our culture the preponderant 
preoccupation is with mass, and 
to such an extent that many 
designers are ‘space blind’.
(Bacon, 1974, 15)
Today, when we look at many fountains and 
the spaces in which they are set, it seems the 
rationale for Sitte’s findings has been forgotten.
Narrative form, as the interplay between masses 
and voids, is not the result of whim or whimsy. 
The mathematics associated with objects and 
spaces that have come to be known as strong orientation points was noted as early as the 1880s by 
Camillio Sitte (1945), again in the 1950s by Paul 
Zucker (1959), and even later by Cullen (1961), 
Ashihara (1970), and Lynch (1971). Spatial proportions, along with Barthes’ philosophical interpretation of the Eiffel Tower, find the Parisian 
landmark set within three domains of influence: 
setting or context, the context’s close-in composition, and the immediate surrounding’s experiences. Based on “the human body and the range 
of human vision” Zucker notes that the close-in 
experience of an object is most favorable when the 
perception of an individual work of architecture 
is set in a vertical angle of 27 degrees within our 
vertical field of vision. He further notes that
the beholder moves instinctively 
to a distance which provides for 
this angle. However, in order 
to fuse various architectural 
units with their surroundings 
into a total impression, which 
is the genuine task of all city 
planning, the eye can employ 
an angle of 18 degrees only.
(Zucker, 1959, 7)
If that angle-distance ratio cannot be achieved, 
then the space feels tight and confining.
Before her, she sees the beginnings 
of the actual form of the town as 
it emerges from among the trees, 
but the path is still tortuous, 
and the form is merely suggested, 
except for the bell tower of the 
church, which will shortly emerge 
as a powerful architectural 
statement, suggesting the character 
of the experience which lies ahead.
(Bacon, 1974, 53)
In Barthes’s terms, the immediate experience of a 
landmark shifts the landscape narrative from one of 
anticipation and context setting to that of an emerging personal experience or with luck the meeting 
of one’s expectations. As with the Eiffel Tower, this 
transition in narrative occurs not only as you get 
closer but also when you enter into it, when you 
become part of the landmark or point when it seemingly disappears.
65
And as the scene unfolds the 
church tower, the climax, is at 
last revealed. Due to [enclosing 
buildings] the angle of the 
road it performs the last act of 
closure before we enter the wide 
main street where everything is 
revealed. This is the final of the 
successive acts of closure which 
formed a series of dramatic visual 
events in a coordinated sequence 
which provides, on a delightful 
domestic scale, a model piece of 
townscape.
(Cullen, 1961, 110)
Another recognition by designers of a narrative form 
related to points is that of the progression one experiences along a journey. The power of punctuation 
to provide a rhythm to a text or a poem is felt in 
walks and journeys through the landscape. A trip 
gains its identity from identifiable points along the 
way. Squares, plazas, alcoves, and intersections are all 
intermediate points along a journey that are more 
than rest and renewal. At a larger scale, this form of 
narrative is experienced in a road trip such as along 
the Virginia to North Carolina Blue Ridge Parkway, 
the 2,200 mile Georgia to Maine Appalachian Trail, 
or the 2,650 mile Mexico to Canadian border Pacific 
Crest Trail.
As intermediate anchors, those special points 
along the route provide a place-based rhythmic 
sequence of happenings linking (or imparting a 
continuity) to places as they help build people’s 
sense of identity with the larger setting, e.g., 
garden, park, town, city, wilderness trek. In Design 
of Cities (1974), Edmund Bacon provides a wonderful exploration of the interplay of the massvoid relationship of obelisks and their gathering 
spaces as they relate to a pilgrims’ journey. He 
details the meandering route taken by pilgrims 
visiting seven churches in 16th-century Rome. 
Using an engraving of the time, Bacon describes 
“the phenomenon of undirected, undifferentiated 
movement” and further states that “[b]ecause it is 
meandering, it would induce in the pilgrims no 
clearly organized sequence of purposeful architectural impressions” (Bacon, 1974, 136). Bacon 
goes on to describe how, with the 17th-century 
introduction of a series of obelisks through Sixtus 
V’s plans for Rome, there is produced “an awareness of the structural relation of functions in what 
appear to be a chaotic distribution of independent functions” (Bacon, 1974, 139). Landmarks 
are the punctuation in a narrative’s progression 
through space and time. As physical objects, they 
are the accents in an unfolding message. They are the 
physical features accenting people’s experiences as 
they pass by, enter into, and participate in the associated spaces. The spaces associated with landmarks 
provide for pauses or rests in an evolving story. 
Pivotal spaces along a route provide for activities different from the linear character of the activities associated with moving forward. Implied landmarks are 
Figure 3.12 Hatch Memorial Shell, Charles 
River, Boston, MA. Photo Credit: Susan Pease/
Alamy Stock Photo.
Figure 3.13 Columbia River, George, Washington. Courtesy of Photographer, Anthony 
Fabrikant.
66
the voids we know as plazas, piazzas, or the intersections of walkways. The physical, observable nature 
of implied landmarks is their tendency to represent 
recognizable moments in a  temporal progression. 
Such landmarks are found in Sienna, Italy’s Piazza 
del Campo and its semiannual festival, Palio delle 
Contrade and the horse race; the annual Fourth 
of July gathering at the Hatch Memorial Bandshell 
on Boston’s Charles River; and the annual Folk 
Festival on the Mall in Washington, DC. At a 
greater frequency, people enjoy weekly concert 
gatherings during the summer along the Columbia 
River Gorge in George, Washington. Yes, there is 
a town called George, Washington. And nearby, 
believe it or not, is Martha, Washington. The bowllike landform overlooking the Columbia River 
Gorge in Washington State is home to a dozen or 
more big-name concerts each summer. These locations, like that of Michael Pollan’s personal hideaway space under a forsythia bush in his childhood 
backyard (1991, 7–8), easily take on the double 
duty of points of initiation and destination, as well 
as geographical locations in time. Pollan distinguishes between a child’s and an adult’s perceptions 
when he notes,
I say that no grown-up knew 
about it [this space] because, 
in an adult’s picture of this 
landscape, the hedge row runs 
flush against the fence. To a 
four-year old, though, the space 
made by the vaulting branches 
of a forsythia is as grand as 
the inside of a cathedral, and 
there is room enough for a 
world between a lilac and a 
wall. Whenever I needed to be 
out of range of adult radar, I’d 
crawl beneath the forsythia’s 
arches, squeeze between two 
lilac bushes, and find myself 
safe and alone in my own green 
room.
(Pollan 1991, 7)
Personal and public affairs begin and end in sites 
of hiding and sites of history: first loves and lost 
loves, triumphs and catastrophes, are places never 
forgotten. Points as spaces or voids are places that 
highlight or accent our lives, as opposed to those 
spaces of more mundane meanings in which we 
gather on a regular basis. Both magnitudes of 
space are meaningful, some are the turning points 
in our lives while others are the stability of regular 
everyday associations on which we rely for a sense 
of security and orientation: sidewalk café, gym, 
parking lot, post office parking lot.
SUBTLE MESSAGES
Points in the landscape are not always as blatant 
as a public square announced by a spire or tower. 
Another family of points includes those that are 
Figure 3.14 Lines express a message. Courtesy American Society of Landscape Architects.
67
simultaneously implicit and explicit. In the realm 
of communication, this is like reading what a text 
has to say while simultaneously reading “between 
the lines.” Or, you may hear what is explicitly said 
by someone while becoming increasingly aware 
of that person’s “hidden agenda.” In basic design 
a point can be implied in the twists of a collection of lines. A similar example is found in the 
American Society of Landscape Architects logo 
of a few years ago. Precisely located expansions 
of certain of the logo’s explicit lines convey the 
implied lines of a landscape.
Landscape examples find people gathering 
under the trees that blend with the surrounding 
landscape to worship at the 236-acre open-air 
Cathedral of Pines in Rindge, New Hampshire. 
Crowds regularly gather for an evening of musical 
entertainment under the trees of Columbia, 
Maryland’s Pavilion. From the air, in plan view, 
these points covered by their respective tree canopies are not evident. At eye level though they 
become more explicit. Even on the ground, the 
continuation of the vegetative canopy of the 
Pavilion’s trees out across the streets and to other 
wooded areas provides a continuity to the greater 
place, differentiated more by shadow patterns and 
the activity areas delineated on the ground plane. 
There are landscape narratives to be read as plan 
views from an altitude of 30,000′. But for us, and 
for those for whom we design, landscape narratives most readily occur on or close to the ground 
at eye level.
These measurable (observable) attributes of 
points in space provide for the locational aspects 
of here and there, distance, right-left, up-down, 
and a sense of orientation. Visitors to and residents of Seattle find help in orienting themselves 
with the city’s Space Needle and Mount Rainier. 
In their singularity, points are statements: the 
object or space itself, with its explicit meanings, 
is associated with attributes like size, shape, material and finish, location (placement), and directional alignment (Greene, 1962; Merleu-Ponty in 
Rosenthal and Bourgeois, 1990, 401–409).
A bench or seat reads “sit here,” “sit alone,” 
“sit with others,” “be comfortable,” or “don’t stay 
long.” Its placement and orientation says, “look 
in this or that direction.” In conjunction with 
a scenic overlook you are set up for an outward 
experience of a long or panoramic view. Or, set 
within a small urban park or garden alcove, you 
are provided a more introverted experience of 
foreshortened, enclosed views. A single bench, 
set near the base of a basalt outcrop with water 
trickling down it, can say, “Sit here and take 
time to look inward.” As statements they are not 
complete narratives, a fact not recognized in the 
papers that comprise volume 2(3) of Landscape 
Review (Lincoln University Press, 1996). While 
the various Landscape Review authors recognize 
individual statements from a landscape-as-text 
point of view, they miss seeing the greater continuity that comes with the statements flowing in a 
landscape-as-narrative progression.
Figure 3.15 Seattle, WA Space Needle and Mount Rainier in background. Shutterstock ID: 
776152702. Contributor: Rudy Mareel.
68
…the use of landmarks involves 
the singling out of one element 
from a host of possibilities, the 
key physical characteristic of this 
class is singularity, some aspect 
that is unique or memorable in 
the context.
(Lynch, 1960, 78)
Advertising uses the principles of placement 
of text, images, and corporate logos to grab your 
attention and direct it in a particular direction 
across a page or computer screen. Lynch’s landmarks provide for much the same behavior relative to finding your way (Lynch, 1960). The 
more readily identifiable (Lynch says “readable”) 
the word, object, or landscape feature, the more 
meaning-full your relationship with it. The less 
readable the objects the more disoriented or lost 
you feel. “Anyone experiencing even momentary 
disorientation and lack of recognition of immediate surroundings has experienced the uncertainty 
of being ‘lost’” (Golledge, 1999, 5). When new 
to a place you test the place’s readability, through 
a trial-and-error dialectic, and eventually acquire 
an understanding of how to read the new, to 
you, landscape vocabulary, to read the new shape 
or form of art, or to appreciate the previously 
unfamiliar object in the landscape. Orientation 
is acquired. A fundamental goal of life is to 
maintain a sense of orientation (Rosenthal and 
Bourgeois. 1990; Bloomer and Moore. 1977). 
However, one’s sense of orientation is a complex 
of three realms of situated knowing: functional, 
socio-cultural, and that of the deeper meanings 
coloring your life. Orientation derived from a 
functional narrative pertains to one’s location or 
knowing where you are relative to where you are 
going or where you have been. This spatial orientation along a path or route links where you are 
going with where you started from. Within the 
socio-cultural realm of narrative, orientation reaffirms or clarifies who you are in your life (Foster, 
2009). You have roots. You know where you come 
from and have some idea of where you want to 
go relative to your future: a blending of the social 
history of which you are a part and your emerging personal biography. The message content of 
a design can spark within you aspects of culture/
history, kinship/family, place experiences, and 
beliefs and spirituality.
As the number of points within or across an 
area increases, their distinctiveness is diminished. 
Their message changes from accents within a 
greater context to becoming the context. In the 
massing of points, an emerging pattern gives rise 
to rows, edges, or enclosure. One tree or building in a field may be a focal point or ornamental accent. Multiplied one after the other, and 
depending upon their layout, a grouping of trees 
grow into an implicit or imagined line with space 
between their canopies. Then, with the addition 
of more trees packed closer together, they become 
a seemingly explicit, solid line. Lines of trees with 
canopies overlapping are hedgerows, buffers, or 
screens. A line of residences moved closer and 
closer together till their exterior walls become the 
common walls of townhouses or row houses. A 
scattering of small retail shops along a street easily 
Figure 3.16 Implicit and explicit points. Drawn by author.
69
multiply into a strip development. Multiplied 
outward in various directions they become land 
use areas. One pine tree can be ornamental, while 
millions are identified with the culturally distinctive region of New Jersey known as the Pine 
Barrens: an ecologically unique region spanning 
more than seven counties (McPhee, 1968; Berger 
and Sinton, 1985).
The multiplication of individual words into 
sentences and then into paragraphs works 
to strengthen the context and content of a 
well-written narrative. In a sense, planes, like 
paragraphs, give body, substance, boundaries, 
and direction to a message. In Fitz Hugh Lane’s 
painting, Norman’s Woe, individual rocks make 
up the curve of the waterline that separates the 
sweeping ground plane of the beach from that 
of the ocean.
The curved recessional of the 
western shore measures the 
depth of space in the right half 
of the picture, the left recedes 
by planes from the screen of 
vegetation thence to the rocks 
at the waterline...smaller rocks 
chart lateral distances across 
the inlet.
(Conron, 1985, 392)
SUMMARY
Space, time, progression, and context are paramount among the building blocks that structure 
the languages with which designs are made and 
through which their narratives are communicated. Learning landscape, architectural, or interior design means learning about what, so very 
often, isn’t seen or heard, e.g., where people are 
not gathering. We often become so captivated 
with things, the word, the mark on a paper or 
canvas, or the object in the landscape, we forget 
our relationship to it and its relationship to us. 
Whether figure or ground, mass or void, object 
or space, a point like a solitary word on a page 
does not exist as an individual entity. Points exist 
in contrast to their surroundings, and in relationship to us once we recognize their presence. 
Points are context dependent, yet interrelated in 
their relevance to each other. Points in whatever 
form provide a complex of implied bits of information to those who experience them. Within the 
realm of people’s sense of identity the appearance 
(or smell, sound, touch) of an object provides for 
a You-It or I-Thou relationship. If the relationship 
is readily identified as a part of your personality, 
your psyche, or profession the sense of identity is 
personal. The story, piece of artwork, or spatial 
environment expresses, and to a degree is, a part 
of you. If it holds meaning for you, if you identify 
with it, then aspects of your heritage and personal 
biography come into play. This is the foundation 
of Potteiger and Purinton’s Landscape Narrative 
Figure 3.17 Brick buildings and tree-lined street in Back Bay, Boston. Shutterstock ID: 89093767.  
Contributor: Jorge Salcedo.
70
(1998), a blending of history and heritage in a 
site, a temple, a community’s landscape. These are 
critical aspects of meaning and message delivery 
explored more completely in the upcoming chapters on narrative.
When there is no 
interpenetration between the 
forms of monuments and the 
[Negative] N-space, which is 
the reverse space, and when 
the two balance each other 
beautifully, monumentality 
becomes unique and its quality 
enhanced.
(Ashihara, 1970, 37)
As designers, we are wrong to consider a 
point as a static singular entity. In landscape 
architectural design we identify points in terms 
of their aspects of location, orientation, size, 
shape, and more. Within the realm of human 
psychology there is again a complex of characteristics that we identify and interpret in 
order to read points both in and of themselves 
and as moments in a larger progression. Good 
design is an orchestration of sequential sensual 
experiences. As John Simonds concludes, in 
his 1961 Epilogue to Landscape Architecture, a 
good designer is one who “...plans not places, 
spaces, or things – one [who] plans experiences 
(my italics). The places, spaces, and things take 
their form from the planned experience” (1961, 
225). So, in whatever form, chose your points 
well. They could be the start or end of something wonderful. 
Figure 3.18 Fitz Henry Lane (1804–1865), The Western Shore with Norman’s Woe, 1862, oil on canvas. 
Collection of the Cape Ann Museum, Gloucester, MA. Gift of Isabel Babson Lane, 1946 (1147.9).
4
Lines
E
ver wonder on the myriad qualities that can 
make up lines? Ever wonder on the multiple 
possibilities those linear qualities can bring 
to a landscape design? If you have, but not yet 
read Theilgaard Watts’  observations (1975, 198–
201) of a forest path that becomes a dirt road, 
that in turn through a series of modern-day modifications becomes an urban sidewalk, then you 
are in for a treat. With no philosophy. No mathematics. Through just good old personal observations, she sees, in the actualities of linear features, 
what the likes of J. B. Jackson sees as the connectivity of places, Susan Langer sees as sequence 
and rhythm, and Ursula Le Guin sees as implicit 
and explicit boundaries. For Jackson, “The Path, 
as I see it, has the prime function of introducing new life to the city, of bringing the city into 
touch with the outside world” (Jackson, 1970, 
102). Langer sees that new life in how words are 
strung together; “But, words have a linear, discrete, successive order; they are strung one after 
another like beads on a rosary…” (Langer, 1980, 
80). Among that myriad of qualities I came to 
understand that make up linear features Le Guin 
shined the brightest light with her opening to The 
Dispossessed when she wrote, 
There was a wall. It did not 
look important. It was built of 
uncut rocks roughly mortared. 
An adult could look right over 
it, and even a child could 
climb it. Where it crossed the 
roadway, instead of having a 
gate it degenerated into mere 
geometry, a line, an idea of 
boundary. But the idea was 
real…Like all walls it was 
ambiguous, two-faced. What 
was inside it and what was 
outside it depended upon which 
side of it you were on. 
(Le Guin, 1974, 1)
Figure 4.1 Q’emiln Park, Post Falls, ID. Photo  
by author.
Figure 4.2 Trees in a line, Lexington, KY. Photo 
by author.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-5
73
74
A critical association between points and lines is 
found in all cultures. The Middle Eastern aspects 
of streets and squares are provided for us at a 
variety of scales of movement by Zucker (1959), 
Rudofsky (1969), Bacon (1974), Benzel (1998), 
Whyte (2001), and more (see Anderson, 1986). 
Among the examples, Benzel shows us how the 
structural relationship between point and line 
are “the two basic organizing elements of the 
Roman house – the main room (atrium) and the 
­corridor – correspond to the two basic organizing 
elements of the city – the main square (forum) 
and the street” (Benzel, 1998, 83).
For change has always 
happened in the margins, 
across human history, and it’s 
happening there now. Seismic 
shifts in common life, as in 
geophysical reality, begin in 
spaces and cracks.
(Tippett, 2016, 1)
I have learned that people 
in the center are not going 
to be the big change makers. 
You’ve got to put yourself at the 
margins and be willing to risk 
in order to make change. 
(Tippett, 2016, 33)
Linear features in architecture, in landscapes, and 
in interiors provide two forms of dialog. One 
form is of information delivery, or that of sharing 
as brought about by connections. We are allowed 
to connect with others through paths, walks, 
roads, rail lines, and airline routes. Each works 
to sequentially deliver, in one way or another, 
information and experiences. The other aspect of 
dialog is generated along the interface of two or 
more abutting areas, in the contrasts or harmonies along the boundary lines of abutting areas. 
Kuhn (1970) talks about new ideas coming from 
the periphery of what we know. He addresses how 
old thinking is labeled as the status quo at the 
center and how revolutionary ideas come from 
those who travel to the outer reaches and experience new kinds of knowledge. We read a similar 
thought regarding new ideas, technology, music, 
and the like coming from the outer reaches in 
what sailing Captain Littlepage says in Jewett’s 
Country of the Pointed Firs (1956) of his travels to 
little known regions.
Most man-made structures or 
places have meaning only to 
man, and only as he experiences 
them. They are revealed to 
man by lines or patterns of 
circulation that lead him to, 
through, over, under, or around 
them…We thus realize that the 
circulation pattern is a major 
function of any project, because 
it establishes the rate, sequence, 
and nature of its sensed 
experience or visual unfolding.
(Simonds, 1961, 145)
Functionally, paths, walks, and the like allow for 
the sharing of goods, commerce, and information. China’s Great Wall both separated enemies 
and delivered soldiers and munitions. So too 
was President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s plan for 
the United States Interstate Highway System for 
the delivery of equipment, munitions, and soldiers. Unlike Eisenhower, who saw roads as part 
of a defense system, Benzel notes that socially, to 
William H. Whyte (2001), streets and roads are 
the “rivers of life, pathways to the center of the 
city, and places where we come together” (Benzel, 
1998, 99). In instances of homes with porches 
and park walkways lined with benches, streets and 
paths act to bring the “show” to the audiences, 
75
as they bring the walkers to the variety of shows 
along the route. Spiritually and psychologically, 
linear features are entwined with developmental 
experiences and with the passages toward spiritual 
and psychological growth: death marches, marriage walks, approaches to rites of passage. At a 
more mundane level, J. B. Jackson (1970; 1994) 
deals with the social development of our society 
and various adolescent rites in numerous articles 
about strip malls, hot rods and cruising, fences 
and paths, and roads in the landscape.
The idea of growth, particularly the step-bystep growth of a line, is indicative of the narrative process. In its physical nature on a page, as oral 
speech, and as that which is heard and read, the 
telling of a story is sequential and additive: word 
by word, sentence by sentence. On foot we construct an ever-increasing understanding of what we 
see, hear, smell, and touch: an orchestration of our 
senses’ abilities to collect data cum information. As 
the breadth and depth of our knowledge of a place 
grows, it either confirms what we expected the 
place’s vocabulary to read like or we piece together 
the vocabulary, based on what we know, in an effort 
to identify the place’s syntax. To some extent learning to read landscape narratives occurs every time we 
experience a new place for the first time. Our acts 
of coding, encoding, and decoding bring into play 
the design principles of rhythm, repetition, and gradation all in support of learning over time and the 
growth of meanings embodied in the place.
Rapoport notes, we don’t know if the meaning 
content of environments comes about in the same 
way as it does in language. No matter. Written 
words, and words as sound symbols are social 
constructs. They provide us the means to communicate (Rapoport, 1982, 48). In terms of 
organizing objects and spaces, designers have a 
lot of latitude in orchestrating what can be seen, 
heard, smelled, touched, and the sequences by 
which they are presented. We have the potential 
to structure the delivery of messages. Barry Lopez 
notes the Eskimo’s fear in regard to this power, the 
power to (re)write a place’s narratives: 
…what the traditional 
Eskimos fear most about us 
is the extent of our power to 
alter the land, the scale of that 
power, and the fact that we 
can easily effect some of these 
changes electronically, from a 
distant city…They call us, with 
a mixture of incredulity and 
apprehension, ‘the people who 
change nature.’
(Lopez, 1987, 34)
It seems they were well aware of the emerging 
Anthropocene Era, and with just cause.
The Anthropocene Epoch is an 
unofficial unit of geologic time, 
used to describe the most recent 
period in Earth’s history when 
human activity started to have 
a significant impact on the 
planet’s climate and ecosystems.
(https://www.
nationalgeographic.org/
encyclopedia/anthropocene)
The implicit and explicit aspects of linearity are 
not exclusive to the content of a landscape design. 
Whether we feel we live in a four-, five-, or six-­
dimensional world, we are linear beings. We move 
about for particular reasons. Our actions are goal 
oriented, and I would say that personal safety and 
satisfaction are at the root of our actions. For this 
reason, and because we are most immediately 
concerned with our personal well-being, I argue 
that function and use are easier to design into a 
narrative and read than those aspects of landscape 
narratives that communicate feelings, emotions, 
and the deeper values making up our collective 
unconscious. Functional messages are the physically featured vocabulary we author and read first. 
76
The landscape lines that communicate function 
and use are explicit. In them are reflected a great 
degree of the causality and probability that drives 
our actions. My thinking, that of Bob Scarfo, is: 
“If I travel in this direction then I will get to…”; 
“If I step here instead of there I will be safer”; and 
“Mixing these ingredients will produce a good 
salad dressing” (see Chatman, 1980, 44). Our 
thinking, as are most of our personal concerns, 
is colored by our expectations (Barthes, 1979; 
Goodman, 1954, 14; Rapoport, 1969; 1982). 
People give more attention to the “channels along 
which the observer… moves… [Pathways are] the 
predominant elements…and along these paths 
the other environmental elements are arranged 
and related” (Lynch, 1960, 47). Even when the 
goal is to meander, the stroller doesn’t want to find 
herself brought to an exit with the only choices 
being to leave or turn around and back track. In 
this situation the stroller’s expectations to wander 
are disappointed. Motion along a path requires 
periodic inspections of what’s up ahead, “Am I 
still going where I intended?” When I arrive, the 
edges of the area I’m in become more important. 
“Have I arrived where I expected to?” Still, “Am 
I in the right place?” Two aspects of our movement through space are found in narratives: linearity and sequential unfolding of anticipated 
experiences. We move along a landscape’s story, 
and at times slow to reflect more deeply on our 
immediate location, situation, and more distant 
surroundings.
Linear features found in written text, basic 
design, and landscapes are the repetition of points. 
Words multiply across a page to form sentences; 
points move through space to inscribe lines. 
Whether words in a sentence, dots on a canvas, 
or objects in the landscape, the motion, sequence, 
gradation, and connection of the respective points 
is guided by organizing principles. In language 
the form and character-giving principles are 
grammar and syntax. In the arts, they are basic 
design principles (Dondis, 1973; Wong, 1972; 
1977) or the expressive rules of aesthetics. In 
society they are a group’s social norms such as 
guided by religion, cultural and family values, 
laws, regulations, canons, building codes, zoning 
regulations, and the like (Yamin and Metheny, 
Figure 4.3 University of Guelph, ON, Canada 
Photo by author.
Figure 4.4 Hole-in-the-Ground, South of Cheney, 
WA. Photo by author.
Figure 4.5 Providence Urgent Care, Spokane 
Valley, WA. Photo by author.
77
1996). While variety comes from how the principles, codes, or rules are interpreted, there remain 
certain fundamental similarities in the resulting 
linear products.
Lines demarcate boundaries, separate areas, 
and give shape. Linear features act as boundaries and edges (Lynch, 1960, 62–66, 99–100, 
111). Paths direct us through and bring to us 
a sequential progression of information. The 
power of our information-gathering progression rests in the qualities of comprehension, 
cohesion, and continuity of the informative 
statements along the way: Lynch’s legibility 
and readability of built environments (1960). 
Keeping the messages simple, easily read, in no 
way negates the depth of what they can express, 
e.g., Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial. That developmental progression of words to sentences to 
statements that become a narrative is not haphazard (Canemaker, 1999; Kooser, 2005; Rae, 
1996). The ordering of information is grounded 
in the socio-cultural grammar and syntax of a 
place and a people. The result is a sequence of 
linear experiences that are progressive (sequential) and developmental (additive). We move 
through a landscape as pattern seekers searching out informative patterns to which we’ve 
been socialized to recognize and use. We look 
to find individual statements building on each 
other in the same manner that individual words 
build on each other to become sentences that 
add up to a story or narrative.
As we move through a landscape, building, or 
interior our senses reach out to points along our 
path. Piaget calls this “taking aim” (Piaget and 
Inhelder, 1967, 155). Personally I like Gibson’s 
idea that our senses are “aggressive, seeking mechanisms” (1979, 97–98). Lund and Merleau-Ponty 
see our information-gathering processes as “exploration” and “becoming” (Lund, 2012, 236). In 
each instance, each of our “taking aim” moments 
occurs along a continuum.
The construction of a straight 
line may be defined as the 
linking of distant points by 
Figure 4.6 Farm Laneway, Maxville, Ontario, 
Canada. Photo by author.
Figure 4.7 Multnomah Falls, OR. Photo by 
author.
Figure 4.8 Radium Hot Springs, Hwy 93, British 
Columbia, Canada. Photo by author.
78
the interpolation of a series of 
points along a direct path…
[they go on] to outline the 
development of the concept of 
the straight line through the act 
of “taking aim” or “sighting”….
(Piaget and Inhelder, 
1967, 155)
These taking-aim moments could also be considered moments of transition from what I take in 
with this step, and then the next step and on to 
becoming more of who I am, where I am, when 
I am. In pursuit of our daily lives we move from 
place to place for various reasons. The fact that 
many of those reasons and accompanying expectations are shared by most people works to a designer’s advantage. While moving or standing still our 
eyes scan the surroundings in an effort to recognize 
things that we can identify. As we build a pattern of 
recognized points along that continuum the points 
become joined. Even in collectively developed 
vernacular environments they are not individual, 
discrete objects and voids. Each is part of and 
contributing to a larger whole. What structures 
the points, as meaningful objects and voids along 
our path, are the purposes for which the paths and 
the areas through which they pass were built and 
our brought-with-us reasons or purposes for using 
them. As we traverse a landscape we interpret the 
functions of walkways versus entryways, streets 
versus boulevards, and intersections versus  forking 
paths. We do not, however, make these interpretations in a vacuum; they are not disconnected 
moments in time or places in space.
The geometric line is an 
invisible thing. It is the track 
made by the moving point; 
its product. It is created 
by movement – specifically 
through the destruction of the 
intense self-contained repose 
of the point. Here the leap out 
of the static into the dynamic 
occurs.
(Kandinsky, 1979, 57)
Points, as lines, are not without context unless, 
as designers, we purposefully toy with the users, 
hopefully in a playful way. Linear features are part 
of the greater continuum, we call life as purposeful motion, and our getting from here to there and 
then doing what we need to once we get there. 
As parts of a continuum, what phenomenologists 
call the “act of becoming,” what we sequentially 
read builds on what was expressed by the previous 
points to formulate complete statements: entry, 
exit, ascend, descend, turn here, walk around me, 
stop, slow down, speed up. All contribute to a 
narrative with a particular theme.
In the realms of written and oral language we 
take aim at the individual words we see and hear. 
Based on our learned communication skills we 
expect the words to flow into identifiable and comprehensible patterns (Habermas, 1981; Forester, 
1985). Our expectation is that the information will 
build from word to word and make sense on the 
way to meeting our expectations. In landscapes, in 
buildings, and in the spaces within and between 
buildings those statements as edges, boundaries, 
paths, walkways, and roads each tell us something 
in how we might interact with the delivery and the 
receipt of information, goods, and services and, 
hopefully, meet our expectations.
Critical to our understanding of movement 
systems is that their location, orientation, and 
surroundings all work to organize the order and 
magnitude of what they transmit. Information 
delivery is why the laying out of circulation patterns is so critical to a design’s success. The organization or authoring of information as oral or 
written expression is a linear progression across 
space and over time (Aminzadeh et al., 2016).
Life is a continuous flow 
of experience; each act or 
moment of time is preceded 
by a previous experience and 
79
becomes the threshold for 
the experience to come. If we 
acknowledge that an objective 
of life is the achievement 
of a continuous flow of 
harmonious experiences, then 
the relationship of spaces to one 
another, as experienced over 
time, becomes a major design 
problem…in which no single 
part can be considered except in 
relation to what immediately 
precedes or follows it.
(Bacon, 1974 19)
A design that expresses a particular character starts 
with a sequence of experiences that introduce and 
build that narrative’s character. The rate at which 
the character-building experiences take place may 
be quick, or slow: traveling a college campus or 
walking by a 12′×12′ front yard of a rowhouse in 
Alexandria, Virginia. The rate often depends on 
available space, the speed of the landscape participant, and aspects of frequency and rhythm which 
as a designer you can, to a great extent, control. 
Keep in mind qualities such as rate, duration, 
and frequency require markers by which people 
measure speed, time, and change. As Lynch notes, a 
path’s directional quality is felt through a gradient, 
or “regular change in some quality which is cumulative in one direction” (1960, 54), that could be 
land uses along an urban road or sidewalk. Lynch 
also notes that as people move toward the center 
of a city they encounter increases in the number of 
signs and symbols, particular land uses, and age of 
the buildings and landscapes (54).
But by formulating topic 
sentences…a writer…greatly 
improves clarity and unity – 
clarity because the reader need 
not infer…which of various 
points touched on is the key 
to the rest of the paragraph, 
unity because stating major 
points clearly and explicitly 
helps…the writer to weed out 
irrelevancies and digressions.
(Guth, 1961, 143)
A street is perceived, in fact, 
as a thing that goes toward 
something. The path should 
support this perceptually 
by strong termini, and by 
a gradient or directional 
differentiation, so that it is 
given a sense of progression…a 
common gradient is that of 
ground slope…a progressive 
thickening of signs, stores, or 
people may mark the approach 
to a shopping node; there 
can be a gradient of color or 
texture of planting as well; a 
shortening of block length or a 
funneling of space may signal 
the nearness of the city center.
(Lynch, 1960, 97)
PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES
Lines do not occur in nature. In fact, like points, 
lines do not exist. They are without width or 
height so they cannot actually have length. 
Mathematicians and designers would find it difficult to agree on what defines or constitutes a 
line. In mathematics lines are one dimensional. 
Yet they’re invisible. As design elements they must 
be given width or height in order to be visible. 
80
For scientists, engineers, and mathematicians to 
produce a graph both the points and the lines 
must take on a certain dimensional quality. 
Rather than getting into the philosophical depth 
of Kandinsky’s thinking (1979) let’s agree with 
Lynch that as edges or boundaries lines are readily 
observed where two different materials or textures 
meet (1960, 100). Paths, roads, and other linear 
surfaces accommodating movement are in distinct 
contrast to the areas around them. Linear features 
are considerably longer than they are wide.
Line – As a point moves, its 
path becomes a line. A line has 
breadth but no depth. It has 
position and direction. It is 
bound by points. It forms the 
border of a plane.
(Wong, 1972, 7) 
The geometric line is an 
invisible thing. The track made 
by the moving point; that is, its 
product… Here the leap out 
of the static into the dynamic 
occurs.
(Kandinsky, 1979, 57)
Edges, boundaries, and to an extent circulation 
routes are typically made of different materials 
than their adjacent areas. In drawings lines are 
our way of visually representing what in reality 
is the separation between objects and spaces or 
textural changes in a surface. Betty Edwards’ 
Exercise in Edges and Contours (1999, 81–96) 
makes this fact clear. You are asked to stare at one 
of your hands while not looking at your other 
hand and the pencil it is holding, or the sheet of 
paper on which it is about to draw. Your eyes are 
to start anywhere and then follow a line around 
your hand, its fingers, their creases. As you visually study your hand you simultaneously reproduce, with your pencil, the movement of your 
eyes with a single pencil line on the paper. What 
you draw as lines on paper are actually representative changes in lighting over the continuous yet 
changing surface of your hand and its contrast to 
its background. The pencil lines are abstractions 
of the changes in texture and lighting.
Figure 4.9 Pure Contour Drawing by student 
Kim Hoang. Edwards (1999, 89).
Figure 4.10 Line variations. Drawn by author.
81
With each (conceptual) line we draw on paper 
or build in the landscape we automatically append 
to its length the added dimensions of width or 
height. The graphic designer Wicius Wong recognizes the kinds of features designers see as lines. 
He notes that 
three separate aspects should 
be considered in recognizing 
a line: the overall shape…
general appearance…curved, 
bent, irregular; the body – As 
a line has breadth, its body is 
contained within two edges. 
The shapes of these two edges 
and the relationship between 
them determine the shape of 
the body…tapering, knotty, 
wavy, or irregular; [and] 
the extremities – These may 
be negligible when the line 
is very thin. But if the line 
is quite broad, the shapes of 
the extremities may become 
prominent…square, round, 
pointed, or any simple shape.
(1972, 9)
CONTEXT-DRIVEN SHAPES
If a line is quite broad then we tend to see it as 
a path, sidewalk, road, boulevard, and the like. 
With regard to urban landscapes, Lynch notes the 
importance of the destination and origin points 
[or ends] of paths to people’s sense of orientation 
in the city (1960, 54–55).
People [in his study] tended to 
think of path destinations and 
origin points: they liked to 
know where paths came from 
and where they led. Paths 
with clear and well-known 
origins and destinations had 
stronger identities, helped tie 
the city together, and gave 
the observer a sense of his 
bearings whenever he crossed 
them.
(54)
Figure 4.11 Jet as point; contrails as lines 
inscribed by points. Photo by author.
Figure 4.12 Snail racing after the receding tide. 
Photo by author.
82
Kandinsky (1979) carries Wong’s thoughts on 
determining the shape of a line’s body further 
when he notes the interdependency of a line with 
its surroundings. He recognizes basic line forms as 
horizontal, vertical, diagonal, angular, and curved 
as reactions to adjacent forces (55–61). We are 
helped in our understanding of the nature of lines 
when we consider his conceptual line as a “track 
made by the moving point” (57). An excellent 
example of such “tracks” made by moving points 
is seen in jet aircraft contrails or the track of a 
small snail chasing an ebbing tide. As tracks of 
points in motion, lines are the products of one 
or more forces acting on them. Kandinsky sees 
straight lines, whether they are horizontal, vertical, or diagonal, as the result of singular forces 
acting on a point which in turn is propelled in one 
direction “with the tendency to run in a straight 
course to infinity” (57). Angled and curved lines 
are the products of two or more forces acting on 
a moving point. With his idea of forces acting 
on lines, we are brought to the static world of a 
point as a pause, a stop, or a place to step outside 
the world of motion, gather together, and take a 
break from that dynamic world of life between 
points. Kandinsky’s view allows us to see the relationship between the character of a linear feature 
and its adjacent forms: sharp or sudden bursts of 
energy versus continuous uniform or graduated 
forces. We see this in geologically young landscapes. Single pulses of energy, or repeated bursts 
of action on a moving point produce one or more 
angles in a line. Much more real than Simonds’ 
river analogy (1961, 158), Theilgaard Watts, in 
her chapter on Canyon Story, provides on-thespot observations of pressures acting on not only 
a river but also the evolving shape, over time, of 
the canyon it runs through (1975, 38–52). See 
Figure 7.9 in Chapter 7, Narrative.
Motion for Kandinsky is of two types. One is 
visual. Your eyes scan an area or follow a linear 
feature across your field of vision. The other form 
of motion is of the body or object. Built and fixed 
linear features traverse and connect separate areas. 
Visually, paths and edges move across your field of 
vision. While such features are fixed in place, the 
act of your moving your eyes to visually traverse 
them contributes to your anticipation of actually 
traversing them. This is Kandinsky’s other form of 
motion, our actual movement along a path, road, 
or walkway.
When linear features gain form and character from their social and ecological surroundings 
they appear to fit with those surroundings. When 
walks, roads, and the like are forced into their 
surroundings, cutting across contours, they do 
not “fit” their topographical contexts. Landscape 
features forced into their settings do not fit their 
contexts. As a result, they typically require continuous upkeep to maintain their shapes’ integrity. 
In this case a site’s maintenance is higher than it 
need be. In the four-dimensional world of everyday life, Kandinsky’s forces are likely noted as 
things that are in your way (rock outcrop, poorly 
located street sign), gusty winds (zig-zag sailing 
course), extremely loud noises (you turn away), 
and the sudden appearance of very bright lights 
(you wince). Watch the trajectory of a hockey 
player just before and then after taking a body 
check. Or, imagine yourself walking along a 
beach, or through the woods, the path you walk 
is likely related to the location of rocks, trees, 
fallen branches, gullies, and earthen mounds. The 
amount of change and sweep in a linear path is 
seen to relate to the size of the  object causing the 
change in the arc of your path. In design jargon, 
the paths visually “fit” their contexts (Figures 4.11 
and 4.12). Excellent examples of working and not 
Figure 4.13 Thomas Cole (1801–1848). View 
from Mount Holyoke, Northampton, Massachusetts, after a Thunderstorm – The Oxbow. 
1836. Photo Credit: Image copyright © The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image source: Art 
Resource, NY.
83
working with natural forces and features are seen 
in John Reps’ Town Planning in Frontier America 
(1969). The early towns and villages of a more 
“organic” collective personality as seen in the 
map of 1722 Boston, MA are laid out with roads 
respecting hills, ponds, and rock outcrops (177). 
Those towns made up of a more intellectual collective personality as seen in the map of 1748 New 
Haven, CT display lot and road layouts made up 
of straight lines and 90-degree angles; topography 
and landscape features be damned (160). 
Like water finding its path, points in motion 
not only react to exterior forces but also continue 
in their altered direction due to momentum. 
Simonds’ use of a river analogy helps us understand pedestrian movement and momentum 
(2006, 228). As a river flows by and around a protruding embankment the water courses toward 
and cuts into the opposite shoreline. Simonds 
relates this “negative current” to pedestrian 
“traffic oriented to the opposite bank…by force 
of momentum” (209).
As artist-designers both Kandinsky and Wong’s 
thinking relate to two- and three-dimensional 
design and art. Even so, their arguments for external forces giving form to lines work in the realms 
of architecture, landscape architecture, and interior design. Similarly, Bacon (1974) and Benzel’s 
(1998) thinking is that linear features respect 
their surroundings; they gain their shape by reacting to their contexts. As landscape architects we 
would say that such features are ecologically sensitive as seen in much of Olmsted’s residential and 
.
Figure 4.14 Spokane, WA, Rockwood neighborhood’s topography gives shape to the Olmsted 
Brother’s road alignments. Photo by author.
Figure 4.15 A contrived pathway along the 
Spokane River that reacts to no immediate 
features or forces. Photo by author.
Figure 4.16 1748 New Haven, CT. Library of Congress Geography and Map Division; G3784.
N4S1 1806.L9 and Courtesy John Reps’ Estate.
Figure 4.17 1722 Boston, MA. Library of Congress Geography and Map Division; G3764.B6 
1725.B6 and Courtesy John Reps’ Estate.
84
park walkways and roadways. However, when 
we explore linear features used by people, we 
also find they gain their shapes from forces from 
within. People and their needs as related to their 
surroundings also give form to the paths they 
travel (Bacon, 1974; Benzel, 1998; Cullen, 1961). 
A fun description of forces shaping Boston’s street 
patterns, based on the belief they arose from 
cow paths, is found at https://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/2018/03/06/boston-streets-cowpaths/ (last viewed November 27, 2021).
Edmund Bacon’s elaboration of a continuity 
of experiences along a route of travel, rhythms in 
time, and their relationship to natural phenomena brings the forces Kandinsky sees acting on 
two-dimensional lines into the four-dimensional 
world of people’s daily lives. Bacon states that at 
a macro-scale “movement systems must be related 
to natural or manmade topography; they must 
take into account the nature of terrain and the 
natural features and structures that are a part of it” 
Figure 4.18 Simonds’ stream and pedestrian traffic analogy (2006, 4th ed., p. 228). Courtesy 
McGraw Hill.
Figure 4.19 Implied line of benches and explicit walkway edge line. Rose Garden, Manito 
Park, Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
85
(1974, 35). Within a more personal framework 
he states that “the actual design of each system 
must relate to the tempo of the movement it is to 
accommodate as well as to the general nature of 
the surroundings…pedestrian movement systems 
require interest, variety, and impressions of rapid 
change” (35). Between the two magnitudes of 
motion, what we can call public and personal, 
he relates the character of circulation systems to 
carts, cars, trucks, and masses of people. Through 
a wealth of examples, we come to see Bacon’s 
reasoning for believing that good urban design 
is based on how well pedestrian circulation is 
designed.
I believe that when the [Market 
Street] project [in Philadelphia, 
PA] is completed, it will have 
been decisively demonstrated 
that the significant architecture 
actually is contained in 
the people street and its 
movement systems, and that 
the architectural expression of 
the several buildings along it, 
each of which may be developed 
by a different owner with a 
different architect, hopefully 
of a high architectural order, 
nevertheless will be subordinate 
in importance to the people 
street.
(Bacon, 1974, 295)
Without explicitly stating it Bacon refers to 
the importance of the street’s spatial character responding to people’s needs and wants. In 
exploring people’s needs and wants as related to 
landscape, architecture, and interior spaces, we 
quickly begin to realize the ways we must consider those who will use the spaces we design 
(Norberg-Schulz, 1980; Rapoport, 1969; Relph, 
1987; Tuan, 1974). This realm of consideration 
is the crux of Chapter 7 which deals with how a 
narrative unfolds.
The idea of an even deeper personal reaction to 
one’s environment is explored by Solnit (2000) in 
Wanderlust: A History of Walking. She sees 
The rhythm of walking 
generates a kind of rhythm 
of thinking, and the passage 
through a landscape echoes or 
stimulates the passage through 
a series of thoughts. This creates 
an odd consonance between 
internal and external passage, 
one that suggests that the mind 
is also a landscape of sorts and 
that walking is one way to 
traverse it.
(2000, 6)
Figure 4.20 Tree-lined Manito Blvd, Spokane, 
WA. Photo by author.
86
As designers, landscape architects can play with 
walkers and strollers’ pace and rhythm. “Thus 
the changing rhythm of walking indicates an 
alteration in one’s relations to the outside world, 
social as well as physical. Thus walking is a metaphor that indicates finding direction in life…” 
(Lund, 2012, 229). Walking actively contributes 
to the collection of information over space and 
time and therefore inescapably contributes to 
an individual’s “becoming” who they are. “If 
one’s path through life reflects the becoming of 
a person, it is clear that walking can be analyzed 
as a metaphor for one’s position in life as well 
as society” (Lund, 2012, 229). Often my most 
creative moments, or periods of creative thinking and problem solving occur during my early 
morning dog walks. I refer to those periods of 
freer thinking and where my mind takes me as 
“Free-Range Thinking.” I was so happy years 
back when I learned Charles’s Darwin used his 
daily walks to discover answers and direction 
to difficult problems he faced while writing The 
Origin of the Species (Young, 2015). 
While working on his famous 
theory of evolution, Charles 
Darwin took a daily walk, to 
exercise his mind and body, to 
think, and to observe. Walking 
the same route each day from 
his house, through shady woods 
and back along a privet and 
hazel hedge-lined field, Darwin 
referred to this as his ‘thinking 
path’. Working on his theories 
and ground-breaking book ‘On 
The Origin Of Species’, Darwin 
thought as he walked. If he 
had a particularly challenging 
problem to consider, he would 
pile 3 or 4 stones on top of each 
other and knock one off with 
a stick on each lap, returning 
home only when all stones were 
cleared.
(Wildlife Wonder, 2020)
FIGURE-GROUND 
SUBSTANCE (MASS – VOID)
As noted, lines, like points, can be explicit, a 
continuous visually apparent edge, boundary, or 
path, or implicit, as seen in a line of trees, street 
lights, or benches along a garden path. In design 
jargon lines are virtual or conceptual, positive or 
negative, masses or voids, and figure or ground 
(Cullen, 1961; Laseau, 1980, 102; Wong, 
1972, 11). Lines constitute physical edges, 
explicit boundaries, or they are implied, and 
yet felt, as noted in this chapter’s earlier quote 
from Le Guin’s, The Dispossessed (1974) or the 
­invisible-to-most turf boundaries fought over by 
neighborhood gangs (Ley, 1974, 230) and noted 
in the March 2018 KCRW news: “Gang Borders 
Create Invisible Walls in Los Angeles” (Avishay, 
2018). Implied lines, those we believe we see in 
the spaces between points, are envisioned due to 
our mind’s desire to recognize patterns (through 
each of our senses). Our pattern-seeking nature 
allows us to connect the dots and see lines where 
there actually aren’t any. We’ve all experienced 
a sense of connection through our other senses. 
Particular smells, sounds, and tastes connect 
many of us with other places, people, and events 
in space and time: the taste of grandma’s turkey 
dressing, the sound of a bicycle bell, and the 
smell of lilacs or sage connect us with other times 
and places. The connecting of temporal points, 
or points in time, is the basis of the work done 
by Ron Lee Fleming’s The Townscape Institute, 
87
http://www.townscape.org/projects.htm (viewed 
December 2021).
Points arranged in a row may 
evoke the feeling of a line. 
But in this case the line is 
conceptual and not visual, for 
what we see is still a series of 
points.
(Wong, 1972, 9)
There is a gray area between the implied conceptual lines that appear to connect a sequence of 
objects, and explicit, actual lines that are unbroken across an area. Spatially, the strength of an 
implied line is related to the relative positioning 
of the viewer to the objects being viewed or read. 
The intensity of implied lines relates to the reduction in space between the linear sequence of the 
objects, as the angle of view becomes more acute. 
When the spaces reduce to the degree that the 
objects seen in perspective seemingly touch or 
overlap, you have the strongest of implied lines. 
Looking down the length of trees alongside the 
road that approaches the French chateau at Vauxle-Vicomte, the acute angle of view allows the tree 
trunks to present a solid wall directing your vision 
straight ahead. At any moment you can turn your 
head to the right or to the left and see the adjacent 
fields framed by the same trees that a moment 
ago made up a linear visual barrier directing your 
view to the road ahead. When acting as an expert 
witness in a lawsuit over the existence of an allegedly illegal hedgerow, I was presented with a real 
mind teaser by the defense attorney: “At what 
distance apart will these plants not constitute a 
hedge?”
The intensity of the connection between points 
in time (this moment with another in your past) 
rests on the importance of the attributes of the 
physical objects, or momentary experiences, to 
the person experiencing them. A particular lacey 
material may evoke memories of a tablecloth 
used at annual family gatherings. The sight of a 
knotted rope over a swimming hole connects you 
Figure 4.21 Turning eyes from looking straight ahead to the right and seeing what Cullen calls “Netting”: shifting view from trees as wall to trees as frame, Spokane, WA. Photos by author.
Figure 4.22 Approach to Vaux-le-Vicomte in 
Maincy, Ile-de-France. Google Maps Copyright 
2022 Google Maps/GoogleEarth.
88
with your first escape from Mom and Dad. The 
smell of sizzling bacon, the sound of a foghorn, 
and the crunching of new fallen snow under 
foot trigger memorable connections for each of 
us. What times and places in your life did they 
connect? A number of place-time moments have 
stood the test of time for me: the turpentine, 
­nostril-burning smell around the refineries flanking the New Jersey Turnpike; the nectar-sweet 
aroma around the Necco Candy factory (many 
years ago) in Cambridge, MA; Mom’s spaghetti 
sauce; and the lemon and mint herbs’ aroma by 
my parking space at home. 
DEFINING AREAS
When lines as edges
are not used or considered as 
paths… [or as boundaries 
they] may be barriers, more or 
less penetrable, which close off 
one region from another; or 
they may be seams, lines along 
which two regions are related 
and joined together.
(Lynch, 1960, 47)
Many “seams” provide for the interface between 
two areas, that zone of adjacency that results in 
social interaction: property lines, demarcation 
of a park’s activity areas, and the signals we set 
out to mark and enclose our personal spaces. 
Gordon Cullen (1961) sees Lynch’s “seams” in 
a variety of forms, all of which provide for a 
sensed separation of two areas and yet penetrability: a low sitting wall between a plaza and 
major walkway, the narrow streets of many 
British and European cities and villages actually 
working to join both sides of the street. Cullen 
describes other seams in terms of pedestrian 
ways (54), juxtaposition (60), immediacy (61), 
and intimacy (69).
Seams come about and are sustained through 
people’s actions and the degree of respect those 
actions show for what we consider here and there, 
us and them, theirs and ours. Our spreading out 
of books, pencils, computer case, and ballcap at 
a library table works to keep most people away. 
Wolves have another way of marking their territory. I can’t help but wonder what category of 
line the fence in Robert Frost’s poem, Mending 
Walls, is. The final line of the poem says “Good 
fences make good neighbors.” Does it do that by 
separating or joining? In Lynch’s language, is it an 
edge or seam?
While most edges do not stand out in people’s minds the way paths do, they are important 
organizing features and in no small way influence people’s lives. Throughout history the political boundaries between Germany and France 
literally moved all over the map. The Cartesian 
thinking that surrounded and constricted Native 
American lands was more lines on maps than on 
the ground. Yet, what those map symbols represented, however, led to people dying and to the 
devastation of numerous cultural landscapes. For 
some, lines aren’t seen: 
close to the meeting of the 
territories of the three Monroe 
[Street gangs]. The site which 
had been intended [by city 
planners] as a playground 
was…well suited as a 
battleground, and in a short 
while [after being built the 
Figure 4.23 A seam: Woornerf, London, UK. 
Shutterstock ID: 1066971254.
89
playground] was under gang 
control.
(Ley, 1974, 230)
Despite the very real yet invisible turf boundaries making up West Chicago, eight young men 
who came to form the first all-Black high school 
rowing team share their lives, and those of brothers and sisters lost, in the documentary, “A Most 
Beautiful Thing” (Cooper, 2020). As a youngster, 
I was very impressed by the storyline of a television show, the name of which I can’t remember or 
find now. The storyline focused on two warring 
factions arguing over who rightfully owned or 
controlled the land covered by a thick pencil 
line on a map that had originally been drawn to 
demarcate the boundary between their holdings.
The last type of implied line is one of connection rather than separation. Lines of sight join 
the viewer and the viewed: views of Mt. Rainier 
and the Cascade Mountains are as much a part 
of urban Seattle as they are part of the residents’ 
psyche. The idea of connection is found in 
Japanese gardens in the use of nearby vegetation 
to frame, and in doing so borrow, and thus bring 
into the garden, distant landscapes. Originally 
a Chinese practice, the term shakkei meant borrowed landscapes or borrowed scenery (Itoh, 
1981, 15). Adopted as a Japanese landscape practice, it was called ikedori. Gorden Cullen’s term is 
netting (Figure 4.21): “this serves to link the near 
with the remote” (1961, 39).
We had been driving through the 
northeastern corner of Poland, 
a country where frontiers march 
back and forth to the abrupt 
commands of history. The same 
fields of wheat and rye moving 
in slow waves with the rhythm of 
the breeze had been Lithuanian, 
German, Russian, Polish.
(Schama, 1995, 23)
Lines of sight, as presented earlier, are an extremely 
subtle yet powerful aspect of a place’s character. 
What is seen, what is brought from a distance into 
an experience, is as important as how the sightline is defined. Consider characterizing the sightlines associated with New England, Nebraska, 
Montana, and coastal rainforest landscapes. How 
would they differ? When relating characteristic 
sightlines with particular regions it isn’t difficult 
to imagine why the long-time resident of Kansas 
can’t understand her sense of claustrophobia when 
visiting New England. Being used to regionally 
characteristic views that extend in all directions 
to the horizon, she feels enclosed in New England 
where the average sightline through tree-laden, 
rolling hills probably averages one-quarter to 
three-quarters of a mile, with occasional opening 
of a mile or two. Then there is the almost conFigure 4.24 Kashan, city plan with bazaar route seen as horizontal line moving through open areas. 
Courtesy Nader Ardalan and Laleh Bakhtiar (1973, 92) and University of Chicago.
90
tinuous summer tree canopy overhead. Recently, 
a Pacific Crest Trail hiker used to the wide-open 
west coast panoramas referred to his Appalachian 
Trail experience as hundreds and hundreds of 
miles in a green tunnel.
In time, as the linear system 
of the bazaar grows, and the 
residential areas (mahall-ha) 
grow from the main spine, the 
old skin is shed and the new layer 
is created.
(Ardalan and Bakhtiar,  
1973, 93)
The concept of a point moving through space and 
inscribing a line is wonderfully evident in Islamic 
cities. The pedestrian spaces 
maintained the concept of a 
center as a single point in space 
that moves in time and creates 
the line, or the linear element 
of the bazaar (1973, 89). This 
reorientation towards a moving 
point introduced a more vital 
planning concept which, even 
today, accepts the growth and 
change as natural phenomena 
of existence.
(Ardalan and Bakhtiar, 
1973, 89)
As a result, the bazaar also exhibits the linear characteristics of growth and direction. 
The bazaar traditionally begins 
at the palace precincts, which 
symbolize the spiritual head of 
the body, and grow cellularly 
in an apparent natural pattern 
in the direction of its symbolic 
heart…going on, then, to the 
opening of one of the city gates.
(Ardalan and Bakhtiar, 
1973, 93)
This cellular growth of an Islamic city is an honest, 
genuine, example of the socio-cultural production 
of space. When I first read Ardalan and Bakhtiar’s 
account the designer in me had two thoughts. 
Bear with me, what I am about to say will seem 
quite strange at first. My first thought was that 
as a designer of others’ living environments I was 
bound to the same ethical responsibilities as when 
humans domesticated the cow. “And when man 
domesticated them, he took on the responsibility 
of nature” (Bronowski, 1973, 26). Think about 
it. Maybe we are taking on the responsibilities of 
people’s parents or grandparents. Whatever our 
relationship we do accept the responsibility to 
provide for and contribute to the health, safety, 
and welfare of people of all ages and abilities. Let 
that simmer in your mind for a while, we’ll return 
to that responsibility in Chapter 10, Ethics in 
Landscape Architectural Design Practice.
That realization of our responsibility as 
designers led me to my second thought. When 
I design an environment that might have otherwise occurred at the hands of hundreds of people 
Figure 4.25 Point-line concept found in the bazaar (Ardalan and Bakhtiar, 1973, 89). Courtesy 
Nader Ardalan and Laleh Bakhtiar and University Chicago Press.
91
over many years in response to their needs and 
wants, I am ethically bound to at least be aware of 
those personal and social dynamics. In taking on 
a design project, I accept, as it were, the responsibilities of individuals, social groups, and a culture 
evolving through its unfolding history. I am duty 
bound to respect their cultural heritage.
Ardalan and Bakhtiar, like Bacon (1973), 
provide numerous examples of pathways, processional corridors, roads, and open spaces that 
grew in a linear fashion due to changing social and 
environmental pressures, or what we might consider Kandinsky’s forces. As a result, each author’s 
analysis of linear and pedestrian movement systems 
expresses the dynamic ebb and flow of cultural 
motion indicative of growth and change. Changes 
over time are not just related to the linear character and forces acting on the lines: they are not 
restricted to basic design or landscape features. 
The character of what is contained in sentences 
making up pieces of literature often changes with 
the re-editing and re-publication of subsequent 
editions. Early editions of E. A. Poe’s short story, 
The Landscape Garden, make no mention of the 
Picturesque or the Beautiful. Later editions note 
both artistic styles. Walt Whitman altered Leaves 
of Grass many times over almost 37 years and eight 
editions. We might say that our responsibilities to 
those left to live with our designs should carry with 
them a certain, within limits, flexibility.
To this point we primarily explored lines as 
horizontal linear features: edges, boundaries, and 
paths flat with the ground. The earlier example 
of a line of trees flanking the road approaching 
Vaux-le-Vicomte and Lynch’s mention of signs 
and buildings does open us up to linear vertical features in the landscape as single points or 
sequences of points seemingly set along a line. 
Introduced as repetitive features they delineate 
and frame space and help measure one’s speed. 
As stand-alone features, vertical linear features make bold statements as points in space 
and time as we’ve mentioned. Church spires 
announce public gathering spaces at their bases. 
Train yard switching towers, air traffic control 
towers, and custom’s house buildings set at the 
edge of urban harbors announce the location of 
people with the power to guide movement, sell 
and trade goods, and manipulate, and tax. They 
announce authority.
While particular skyscrapers symbolize economic power and corporate egos (Domosh, 
1996), they also often act as landmarks enabling 
people to orient themselves as they approach and 
enter into a city or town. The Seattle, Washington 
and Toronto, Ontario space needles and the Eiffel 
Tower each provide the same services of orientation, sense of place, and announced gathering. 
At a smaller scale, similar features can be used 
in parks and plazas, and at an even smaller scale 
pillars and cairns can be used in gardens. 
Markers of gradation, and Lynch’s variant 
called scaling (1960, 55), occur along paths or 
a sequence of nodes or vertical features or landmarks along the path. Nodes are spaces in which 
people gather, reorient, and transition from one 
direction to another. They can be intermediate 
areas or final destinations. Such spaces are road 
intersections, piazzas, plazas, town squares, or a 
sequence of small parks. They are central business 
districts and ethnic districts (Little Italy, Barrio, 
Chinatown), and transportation hubs. While 
Figure 4.26 CN Tower, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Shutterstock ID: 776152702. Contributor: 
jessica.kirsh.
92
nodes are areas of use (intersection and gathering), they are not typically considered linear features. Many are, however, often associated with 
the vertical feature Lynch labels as a landmark.
Imagine approaching a community you’ve 
never been to before. Imagine the signals you’re 
looking for that will first get you to a gas station and 
then a hospital. The shapes that express one or the 
other, even at a distance of a mile or more, bring 
with them very different collections of contingent 
and anticipated forms. There isn’t a cause-and-effect 
order linking specific forms and uses but there is a 
collection of contingent objects and spatial forms 
that you piece together as a pattern that expresses 
the likelihood you will arrive at the hospital and the 
gas station. This piecing together of parts into an 
identifiable pattern that says gas station or hospital is 
based in what Kooser refers to as “a reader’s collective 
associations with words” (2005, 112).
Taking from what we’ve dealt with thus far, 
it is important to touch on the potential we, as 
designers, hold to the authoring of a design’s narrative. For many, I’m sure the idea of introducing causality and contingency into the creative 
process rubs the creative side of your personality 
the wrong way. New design students so frequently 
believe that creativity is the freedom to sprinkle 
things about a site, or structure, or interior until 
Figure 4.27 Arc de Triomphe, Paris, France. 
Contributor: Eric Isselee. Shutterstock ID: 
1867822423 Inc.
Figure 4.28 Dupont Circle, Washington,  
DC. Photographer Julia Armstrong,  
Aero-Imaging, Inc.
     
Figures 4.29.1 and 4.29.2 The Watts Towers in Los Angeles, CA. Once condemned now on the 
National Historic Register. Built mostly of found objects by Simon Rodia between 1921 and 
1954. Left: Shutterstock ID: 98082746, Contributor: James Michael Dorsey; Right: Shutterstock ID: 
1400348636. Contributor: Walter Cicchetti.
93
they look right with no agreed-upon basis for 
what defines what looks right. If you feel, like 
some modern authors, that causality is too strict 
a relationship between story (narrative) and discourse (expression) you may find more to agree 
with in Jean Pouillon’s concept of “contingency,” 
as the dependency of word-images for their “existence, occurrence, character, etc. on something not 
yet certain” (Chatman, 1980, 47). As we move 
about a landscape we often refer to Pouillon’s 
“not yet certain” anticipations or what we expect 
to encounter up ahead. People have the ability to 
connect the most divergent of events and items in 
an effort to make sense (and identify a pattern). I 
remember a creative-thinking problem that asked 
us to list the similarities between a watermelon 
and a spoon.
Our tendency to pattern building (seeing faces 
or animals in clouds, shadows, or ink blots) works 
in a landscape architect’s favor but even then there 
are limits as to what can be brought together and 
in what order. With even a general knowledge of 
why people approach, enter, traverse, or stay in a 
site the designer acquires insight into the user’s 
anticipated landscape vocabulary and experiences. 
Once identified we have a context from which 
to derive contextually appropriate messages and 
begin to author a narrative. We have a basis on 
which to employ Pouillon’s contingencies and 
author a narrative’s contents with considerable 
assurance that the story to be read will be read 
and will be understood, at least at the level of 
functional messages and users’ health safety, and 
welfare.
The acts of authoring and reading landscape 
narratives are those of mediation and interpretation: “…the ordinary reader is not trying to 
recreate the author’s original meaning” (Wolff, 
1981, 107). I agree with Wolff’s statement that 
“The reader therefore fixes the [anticipated] 
meaning in the act of reading,” but the author 
and designer-as-author must work to guide 
those anticipations and limit the reader/user 
from straying too far.
In basic design and landscape design the final 
narrative belongs to the observer-participant 
or user-as-reader. Done well though, landscape 
design can display an explicit, easily read, narrative of function and use. More challenging, but 
not impossible to express, are those message items 
that communicate feelings, emotions, history and 
heritage, and national pride. Aesthetic narratives 
leave the greatest room for flexibility between 
what the author-designer intends and what the 
user-reader constructs. Keep in mind, landscape 
aesthetics are not those of a passive art observer 
viewing a painting or listening to a concert, landscape aesthetics are derived from a choreographic 
involvement of at least four, if not five, of the 
landscape participant’s senses as that participant/
reader moves through an environment.
BEGINNING TO THINK IN 
TERMS OF NARRATIVE
The comparative study of the 
mythologies of the world compels 
us to view the cultural history of 
mankind as a unit; for we find 
that such themes as the firetheft, deluge, land of the dead, 
virgin birth, and resurrected hero 
have a worldwide distribution 
- appearing everywhere in 
new combinations while 
remaining, like the elements of 
a kaleidoscope, only a few and 
always the same. 
(Campbell, 1969, 3)
Well-articulated, functional messages expressed 
by landscape features either work or they don’t; 
with degrees of ease a gateway allows access or it 
doesn’t, a walkway serves people’s movement or it 
doesn’t. The ease of people’s movement through 
a place is provided by a certain degree of control 
over the delivery and the unfolding of the message 
sequence and the opportunities to slow and reflect 
or become reoriented in the narration. Granted, 
what the user sees and what the sequence allows 
94
to happen do offer a certain latitude in the user’s 
unfolding narrative. Still, the freedom afforded 
the user-as-reader is not so loose that she can, in 
a sense, think what she wants. This logic is found 
in the structure of oral history, or storytelling. The 
order of the presentation need 
not be the same as that of 
the natural logic of the story. 
Its function is to emphasize 
order - emphasize certain story 
events, to interpret some and 
to leave others to inference, to 
show or to tell, to comment or 
to remain silent, to focus on 
this or that aspect of event or 
character…each arrangement 
produces a different plot, and a 
great many plots can be made 
from the same story.
(Chatman, 1980, 43)
Literally, syntax means the 
business of constructing 
sentences: it defines the way 
of putting words together 
so that they have meaning, 
carry information. In this 
context the idea of syntax of 
urbanism conveys the belief 
that the elements of the built 
environment can be put 
together in such a way that 
they have collective meaning. 
The buildings and spaces and 
all impedimenta of the city 
comprise the vocabulary. Here 
[in Syntax of Cities] it is being 
proposed that the vocabulary 
be used according to a syntax 
which draws a positive 
response, not only in the 
verbalistic sense but also from 
the deeper, non-rational levels 
of the mind. Urbanism has 
the potential to speak through 
images and symbols which 
unite urbanized humanity….
(Smith, 1977, 17)
The origin myths of the world’s 
mythological systems differ 
too; but in all except the most 
rarefied the conviction is…
that the living universe is the 
handiwork or emanation - 
psychical or physical - of  
some father-mother or motherfather God.
(Campbell, 1969, 85)
[The I Ching is comprised 
of] family members in their 
various roles: the strong 
father, the devoted mother, 
the arousing eldest son, the 
dangerous middle son, the 
resting youngest son, the gentle 
eldest daughter, the intelligent 
middle daughter, and the joyful 
youngest daughter…[which 
95
in turn represent] the seasons, 
parts of the body, points of the 
compass, plants, animals… 
(Wing, 1979, 15)
The order in which landscape features are presented is guided, to a great extent, by syntax as 
the rules, principles, and processes that govern 
the structuring of sentences, specifically their 
word order – the sequence in which words are 
put together to make sentences, and make sense. 
Like word choice and sequencing, the collection 
of landscape features expressing a place’s proposed functions, activities, and destinations will 
make or break a place’s readability and the users’ 
experiences. Consider a parking lot. What do you 
anticipate and as a result look for in order to safely 
arrive at a parking slot? What do you anticipate 
finding when you decide to look for a café? A high 
school versus elementary school? Urban center 
versus town or village center?
An ordinary language like 
English is a system which 
allows us to create an infinite 
variety of one-dimensional 
combinations of words, called 
sentences.
(Alexander, 1979, 185)
A pattern language is a system 
which allows its users to create 
an infinite variety of those three 
dimensional combinations 
of patterns which we call 
buildings, gardens, towns.
(Alexander, 1979, 186)
Semantics is a branch of linguistics concerned 
with meaning – relationships between signifiers 
(the words or landscape objects) and what they 
stand for. With some understanding of people’s 
likely goals as they participate in a particular place 
a designer is presented with a basis for the formulation of the syntax of a place. That grouping of 
what I consider the family of spatial forms, their 
defining colors and textures, and ancillary defining objects is drawn from what the user-as-reader 
will most likely seek to identify. Consider your 
expectations as you approach a marina versus a 
used car lot. The degree to which a design realizes the syntax sought by the user contributes to 
the comfort the user will likely experience. The 
greater the discrepancy between what is expected 
and what is found the more the reader must work 
to piece together the syntax of that place, the 
vocabulary of the landscape narrative, before he 
or she can move about comfortably. Finding a discrepancy between the anticipated and the actual is 
like reading a mystery which may be the design’s 
objective.
The better we understand “who done it,” the 
more readily we can identify a landscape narrative’s signals and patterns. Increasing the gap 
between the syntax sought and the syntax found 
presents the designer with the responsibility of 
anticipating the extent to which the user-as-reader 
will have the time or the inclination to figure out 
and become familiar with the design’s syntax and 
therefore its vocabulary. The more unique, and 
unusual, a design’s form and content, the longer a 
person needs to come to understand the rules of 
the place. This brings to the designer the added 
responsibility of providing, through organization and arrangement (of objects and spaces), 
the means by which the user can come to recognize, identify, and interpret the unfamiliar spaces, 
objects, and sequences that make up the design.
Context and grammar are inescapable in landscape narratives. Sites are situated in established 
geological, geographical, and climatological locations, each of which brings certain conditions 
or contingencies (Forman and Godron, 1986; 
Watts, 1975). Each site comprises larger contexts 
dependent upon smaller and smaller subordinate 
contexts and vice versa. Each has a particular 
history, and a current status as seen through the 
tinted glasses of people’s cultural value systems 
(Conzen, 1990; Cosgrove, 1984; Cronon, 1983; 
Rapoport, 1969; 1982). In an ecological, or 
96
grammatical sense, each of these interdependent 
contexts provides for rules that, if followed, allow 
a design to “fit” or “work.” If not followed then 
a design fights with the social and environmental dynamics of its setting and requires constant 
upkeep.
Christopher Alexander speaks to the interconnectivity, and interdependence, of patterns or 
what we read, when brought together, as contexts. 
What is most important 
about this sequence [of larger 
to smaller patterns] is that it 
is based on the connections 
between the patterns…In short, 
no pattern is an isolated entity. 
Each pattern can exist in the 
world only to the extent that it 
is supported by other patterns: 
the larger patterns in which it 
is embedded, the patterns of the 
same size that surround it, and 
the smaller patterns which are 
embedded in it.
(1977, xii–xiii)
There are an enormous number 
of people out there with 
invaluable information….
all you have to do is pick up 
the phone…And it may also 
turn out that in searching for 
this one bit of information, 
something else will turn up 
that you absolutely could not 
have known would be out there 
waiting for you.
(Lamott, 1994, 147)
In a good design, all the components can be read 
and interpreted. This calls upon a designer/author 
to research a topic before writing on it. To do so 
for a design is to become informed of the character of a design’s elementary parts and the overall 
characteristic dynamics of which it will become 
a part. To violate the grammar of a place is like 
building seawalls to save beach-front homes, only 
to have to regularly replace both the walls and the 
homes, e.g., Ocean City, Maryland, San Padre 
Island, Texas, and Whidbey Island, Washington 
provide great examples. To work within a place’s 
ecological setting a good designer not only works 
with the local natural dynamics but also becomes 
aware of social meanings associated with the 
respective points, lines, planes, sequence, and 
rhythms of the place’s elementary features.
POWER OF LINES
The power of linear features in a landscape resides 
in their ability to bring about connections both as 
paths and edges or what Lynch calls seams (1960, 
47). While most people consider edges or boundaries as separators, take a moment to consider 
the kinds of concentrated political and economic 
power associated with boundaries. The boundaries to the north and south of the United States 
receive tremendous amounts of attention, money, 
rhetoric, and political time and energy. Neighbors 
argue over property lines, cities and citizens litigate rights-of-way, and politicians and religious 
Figures 4.30.1 and 4.30.2 Sea wall vs. ocean,
San Padre Island, TX. Photos by author.
 
97
leaders debate national boundaries. By the very 
fact, as Lynch states, that edges and boundaries 
separate different activity areas and land uses our 
attention is also brought to bear on the contrasting differences of surface materials and adjacent 
landscapes or building character actually brought 
together by the edges, or seams.
Edges are the linear elements 
not used or considered as 
paths by the observer…They 
are lateral references rather 
than coordinate axes. Such 
edges may be barriers, more 
or less penetrable, which close 
one region off from another; 
or they may be seams, lines 
along which two regions are 
related and joined together. 
These edge elements, although 
probably not as dominant as 
paths, are for many people 
important organizing features, 
particularly in the role of 
holding together generalized 
areas, as in the outline of a 
city by water or wall.
(Lynch, 1960, 47)
Edges may act as seams, linear features “along which 
two regions [or activity areas] are related and joined 
together” (1960, 47). Seams are penetrable “to some 
depth with the regions [or areas of differing activities] 
on either side…[they constitute] a line of exchange 
along which two areas are sewn together” (100). 
Edges and seams are more connectors of space than 
time. As such they remain rather static. Maybe we 
should consider edges as features of potential energy.
However, a more important and vital form of 
connection comes in the form of paths, walks, 
roads, and other forms of circulation. They may 
act as seams, boundaries, or edges, but they are 
characterized by motion. As such they bring into 
play the power to connect time, and space. Also, 
as stated earlier, people’s movement across space 
and through time enables the additive quality of 
sequential progression. These qualities are not 
abstractions. As designers we must think of physical features and their qualities in terms of the 
sequential experiences they foster and the experiences and functions participants are there to fulfill.
The power of these linear experiences is twofold: that of the user and that of the designer. 
From the user’s viewpoint motion enables life; life 
is learning by being brought to new experiences. 
The sequential experiences by which we arrive at 
(or are brought to) statements have a lot to do 
with the degree to which we enjoy what we read, 
watch, and listen to as we traverse a landscape. 
A smooth ground plane going straight ahead 
can provide a clear concise order to messages. A 
straight, uncluttered motion contributes to users’ 
efficient and comfortable movement. Too much 
though would be boring. Less obvious, more 
subtle variations in ground plane and direction 
of pathway call for slower pace, even occasional 
stops to take in the surroundings and become 
reoriented before continuing on. Then there is the 
withholding of information or messages, breaking or altering of an expected linear sequence to 
introduce a degree of mystery or levity; the need 
to circle back or backtrack moments of “aha,” and 
decision points asking you to decide “Do I go this 
way or that or maybe both?”
In that a landscape narrative, in order to be 
read, calls for motion, a designer’s authoring 
of compositions takes the form of a planned 
orchestration or choreography of others’ movements (Aminzadeh et al. 2016). The primary and 
secondary sequences designed into a site have a 
lot to do with how comfortable people are in 
the execution of their daily activities. There are 
the experiences we label as “having a good day.” 
Our experiences went smoothly. There were no 
unexpected detours or delays. Understanding a 
different kind of comfort has become the focus 
of psychologists, physiologists, medical doctors, 
and child development specialists regarding 
98
­individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities: autism, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, dementia, Alzheimer’s and 
Parkinson’s disease, and the elderly and infirm. 
We now know that walking to school through 
green environments helps kids with ADHD 
remain calmer and more focused longer than 
when they walk through concrete environments 
(Kuo and Taylor, 2004). There are a growing 
number of related residential projects in Britain, 
Denmark, Canada, and the United States for 
diverse populations needing as much attention 
by designers as by medical and health-care professionals. Examples include (all the following 
sites were viewed on March 1, 2022):
Dementia Village, Denmark: https://www.dailyscandinavian.com/dementia-village-denmark/
Dutch “dementia village” offers beer, bingo, and 
top-notch health care: https://www.businessinsider.com/inside-hogewey-dementia-­
village-2017-7
Canada’s Langley Village: https://www.thevillagelangley.com
Building Ohana, Spokane, WA: https://www.
buildingohana.org/village-in-planning
Japan’s Villages & Towns: https://www.
alzheimers.net/11-02-16-japanese-city-­
confronts-dementia-through-community-care/
UK, Outdoor Spaces for Adults with Autism: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/256547367_Green_Spaces_Outdoor_
Environments_for_Adults_with_Autism
Housing Design for adults with Autism: 
https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/228448997_Living_
in_the_Community_Housing_Design_for_
Adults_with_Autism
Portland’s Memory Garden: a multisensory 
garden for those suffering from memory loss. 
https://issuu.com/joelgrogan/docs/portland_
memory_garden_history_fina
A CALL TO ACTION
Consider what we take for granted each time we 
read a poem or experience a landscape. Imagine 
yourself along with a hundred other people and 
no mutually agreed upon sounds, smells, textures, 
and visual signals with which to communicate: 
no memory, nothing to recall, no ability to recall, 
no basis of recording or capturing a thought or 
observation, storing it for others, and later sharing 
it with them. Without individual memories built 
into a larger collective social memory how would 
you formulate an idea? And, even if you were able 
to conceive a thought, without mutually agreed 
upon sounds, symbols, and signals, or combined 
sensations, how would you communicate that 
thought? Oral history would be nonexistent, and 
the transmission of culture would not occur. An 
alphabet would be so many pebbles randomly 
scattered across the sand. In such an environment, 
how could we safely walk, drive, or ride a bicycle 
anyplace, let alone find our way back?
One note before moving on. The above 
paragraph pretty much defines dementia and 
Alzheimer’s disease. 
Dementia does not make us 
crazy. It simply forces us to 
interact with the world and 
people around us using a 
more limited set of skills than 
we have been accustomed to 
employing, and that in turn 
causes predictable emotional 
reactions.
(Cornish, 2019, 136)
If in fact, as Judy Cornish states, there is a degree 
of predictability to individuals living with intellectual and developmental differences, I believe 
it is our responsibility as designers to study and 
interpret those differences as they can be supported by designed environments.
I took this moment to share these thoughts 
with you because I agree with Cornish’s distinction between treatment, which assumes a 
cure, and care or strength-based care for the 
whole person. We cannot give the medical and 
99
­pharmaceutical industries full responsibility for 
those whose cognitive skills are changing. Cornish’s 
recognition that people developing Alzheimer’s 
and dementia appear to retain and in some cases 
hone their intuitive skills is, I believe, the doorway 
through which architects, landscape architects, and 
interior designers have a strong potential to design 
supportive living environments. What we consider 
a loss of cognitive abilities is more a shift in perception, or the manner in which one reads their 
surroundings, than a loss. While millions of people 
wait for medical and pharmaceutical solutions to 
regain what is lost, my hope is that professional 
design programs will promote research into what 
and how cognitively impaired individuals read and 
interpret the messages and stories expressed by 
their surroundings and in doing so bring about an 
environmental form of care for the whole person.
Design guidelines, and therefore the basis upon 
which to author appropriate architectural, landscape, and interior design narratives are limited. 
It is up to us, as designers, to develop interdisciplinary partnerships to research and provide 
environmental design criteria that may be applied 
to inclusive personal and intentional community 
environments. It will be a challenge. But not only 
will those being designed for benefit but so will 
the greater public by allowing them to participate 
in the greater community.
As designers, we give up the luxury of being 
ignorant of so many things we previously took 
for granted. As designers, we need to become 
familiar with the fundamental social attributes 
that structure the languages we use (words, forms, 
spaces) to compose a design thought, to hold 
that thought, and to communicate that thought 
as built form so that it can be comprehended by 
those for whom we design. We also need to recognize how communicating personal and cultural 
appreciations through designed spaces involves 
the dynamic interplay of time, space, and the 
participants. This thinking goes to the heart of a 
response I gave my Dad years ago when he questioned my becoming a landscape architect. “Why 
four years of university just to plant bushes?” I 
responded, “Dad, I don’t know what landscape 
architecture is but I am sure it is much more than 
just planting bushes.”
5
Planes
P
lanes are the outcome of points moving 
through space to become lines and lines, 
in turn, moving through space to inscribe 
planes. Earlier the mathematical absence of 
points and lines was introduced even though as 
landmarks and edges designers would argue they 
do exist. Now, with the introduction of planes, 
we have the three primary landscape features – 
ground plane or floor, vertical plane or wall, and 
overhead plane or ceiling or sky – which when 
brought together provide us with measurable 
spaces or volumes.
In the world of geometry planes, like points 
and lines, have no thickness, they are two dimensional. Planar surfaces are measured in terms of 
area, not volume; this is a simple distinction, 
but as evidenced in their language, it is one not 
easily grasped by many design students or, for that 
matter, practitioners.
Planes are characterized by length and width 
(or breadth). They are described (or measured) 
with reference to their location and their direction, for those that are elongated. Compact 
planes, such as a circle, square, or star shape, are 
more directionless and typically noted with regard 
to their location. The repetition of planes across 
a space to provide a front-to-back, side-to-side, 
or top-to-bottom structure, or the use of two or 
more planes in combination introduces the sense 
or actuality of volume. Our consideration of the 
part planes play in The Analogy is helped by a 
simple reminder of the vocabulary distinguishing 
the two-dimensional character of area forms from 
the three-dimensional character of volumetric 
forms.
Area 
Volume
Square
Cube
A more complete 
overview of the 
two- and threedimensional 
figures 
mentioned 
here is found 
in Ching’s 
Architecture: 
Form, Space, and 
Order (1978).
Rectangle
Box or Cylinder
Circle
Sphere
Triangle
Cone; Pyramid
Trapezoid 
Trapezoidal Prism
Figure 5.1 Rainbow Road, Reykjavik, Iceland. 
Photo by author.
Figure 5.2 Three planar features: horizontal 
water, vertical rocks, and overhead sky – Banks 
Lake, WA. Photo by author.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-6
101
102
As to stretch your mind a bit, let’s build upon 
the reading-writing and basic design metaphor. 
Added one after the other, sentences are brought 
together through a grammatical process into paragraphs that physically take up a two-dimensional 
area on a page, a computer monitor, or phone 
or tablet screen. While some paragraphs can be 
single sentences, appearing longer than they are 
wide, others can be equal on all sides, or take up 
a whole page. In basic design planes rarely occur 
alone, in much the same way paragraphs come 
together with other paragraphs to make a chapter 
or a volume. Although, having said that about 
single planes, all paintings are actually single 
planes, but made up of multiple overlain planes 
to provide a sense of perspective. The planes they 
house are illusory. The sense of depth provided by 
a series of planes in a painting does not diminish 
their capacity for narrative, particularly when they 
include human figures. People depicted in paintings “can act as a surrogate inviting the spectator 
into the picture.” In reference to Asher Durand’s 
tribute to Cole, which included Cole and the poet 
Bryant in conversation in the painting, the spectator “Becomes a third party to their discourse” 
(Novak, 1980, 185). Once we give our attention 
to the surfaces of planes that work as a path, a 
walkway, or a roadway, we begin to consider the 
sequence and positioning of ground, vertical, 
and overhead planes which bring with them the 
greater substance or content of the narrative we 
are authoring across a site.
The easiest way to understand what I mean 
by planes as related to sketches and paintings is 
easily experienced where you live, work, or go to 
school. Get a thin-nibbed marker. Pull a stool 
up by a window. Select a distant object you see 
through the glass, then draw it on the glass with 
your marker. The glass is acting as a picture plane 
in the perspective you are viewing. While there 
are discernable foreground, middle ground, and 
background planes, their objects and spaces are all 
captured on the one plane that is a canvas, sketch 
pad, computer screen, or the pane of glass on 
which you outlined your selected object.
Nikola Tesla, the technological 
genius [who invented…the 
florescent light and the A-C 
generator, ‘could project before 
his eyes a picture, complete in 
every detail, of every part of the 
machine’…Further, he claimed 
to be able to test his devices in 
his mind’s eye ‘by having them 
run for weeks – after which 
time he would examine them 
thoroughly for signs of wear’.
(McKim, 1972, 8)
In most instances, when two or more different 
planes are used in a landscape design, a distinction between two- and three-dimensional thinking is called into play: 
…a difference in attitude. A 
three-dimensional designer 
should be capable of visualizing 
mentally the whole form and 
Figure 5.3 Kindred Spirits (1849). By Asher 
Brown Durand. Oil on canvas. Courtesy Crystal 
Bridges Museum of American Art.
103
rotating it mentally in all 
directions…thoroughly explore 
the play of depth and flow 
of space, the impact of mass 
and the nature of different 
materials.
(Wong, 1977, 7)
Today we have graphic software capable of providing fly-throughs. A shift in perception, from 
two-dimensional sketches to the sculptural 
objects they represent, is difficult, but not impossible to make. Some people can go so far as to 
imagine four dimensions in their mind’s eye and 
run machines, check them for their efficiency, and 
locate wear (McKim, 1972, 8).
Those who have difficulty imagining three 
dimensions need to sketch objects and then 
build them. The more easily we can picture three 
dimensions, the closer our conceptual abilities are 
to including four-dimensional thinking: the time 
involved in moving through the environment we 
are imagining or designing. Computer graphics 
and the ability to generate a “fly-through” help 
both three-dimensional thinkers and non-designers. 
Moving through a proposed designed environment 
allows the viewer to identify gaps in the progression 
and flow and begin to include even more considerations associated with the sequencing of spaces, the 
movement through a site, the growth of plants, and 
the phasing of projects over time.
The practice of three-dimensional thinking is 
readily helped by doing quick sketches on trace 
paper. It’s a cheap, readily available learning 
technique. Taking the next step of transforming 
a two-dimensional representation into a three- 
dimensional model or sculpture quickly illuminates the shortcomings of a sketch in the early 
stages of a design and helps us in our ability to see 
a finished object. This is where you come to see 
how storyboarding helps find gaps in one’s design 
thinking. Another good exercise to help hone our 
visualization skills is to recall a common interior 
or exterior space and draw it from memory. Once 
done, then visit the space with your drawing and 
check your accuracy. The ability to envision three 
dimensions in a two-dimensional drawing is the 
reason I believe three-dimensional modeling 
and sculpture studios are excellent foundation 
classes for would-be designers. Seeing what you 
are looking at or envisioning is key to being able 
to bring design ideas to reality. Betty Edwards 
provides a wonderful foundation, or first step 
to learning to see. In The New Drawing on the 
Right Side of the Brain (1999), Edwards doesn’t 
so much help you learn to draw as she helps you 
learn to see. The better you can see what you are 
looking at, or envision what you want to bring 
into existence, the more accurately you can draw 
it for others to see, whether on paper or computer. 
I also believe that with the ability to clearly see 
what you’re imagining comes the ability to write 
more clearly. Many of you will experience this 
improved clarity in the interconnectivity of your 
seeing-writing-drawing when you reflect your 
written narrative off your storyboard, and again 
when you interpret your storyboard into your 
final design.
Drawing is a curious process, 
so intertwined with seeing 
that the two can hardly be 
separated. Ability to draw 
depends on ability to see the 
way an artist sees, and this 
kind of seeing can marvelously 
enrich your life” (Edwards, 
1999, 2). “Most people never 
learn to see well enough to 
draw (2)…[but] as many of 
my students have told me, their 
lives seem richer because they 
are seeing better and seeing 
more” (7).
Time, the fourth dimension, works in favor of 
most landscape designs because the dominant 
104
landscape medium is plants. They grow in size, 
area of coverage, and seasonal character. The temporal aspect of architecture, landscape architecture, and interior design is most applicable to 
the visual testing of people’s movement through 
a project, neighborhood, downtown, or region. 
Even more difficult for students to grasp than 
seeing three dimensions in their two-­dimensional 
drawings is the role time plays in their designs. 
Even though there are computer programs to 
help reduce the difficulty of seeing beyond two 
dimensions and over and around changing elevations and through plants’ growing periods, 
students will likely continue to have difficulty 
considering the influences on their designs of 
changes associated with sunrise to sunset (spectrum of colors, light levels, shadow movement, 
angles and patterns); sunset to sunrise (artificial 
lighting, phases of moonlight, changes in temperature and moisture levels); seasons (birth, 
growth, maturing, and death of vegetation; 
micro-climates; changing forms of precipitation). These are cyclical processes, periods of 
transition, that are so much a part of our daily 
lives that they are frequently taken for granted, 
even by designers. This is why it is so important that we consider the message content of our 
work from at least two, somewhat antithetical, 
viewpoints: coming and going, setting up and 
breaking down, entering and leaving, awakening 
and going to sleep. 
Astronomical time is really 
spatial…best represented 
by symmetrical space…of 
cardinal directions modeled 
after the stars, particularly the 
North Star and the sun. It is a 
diagram of the daily path of the 
sun, and more importantly, of 
the seasonal cycle.
(Tuan, 1978, 8)
While everything about us exists in at least four 
dimensions, we regularly consider, and therefore, 
reinforce life as two dimensional. We live in a 
four-dimensional space and inhabit a life realm 
that is a dynamic state of equilibrium, or, as the 
phenomenologists would say, a continuous state 
of becoming. Yet, we seem intellectually ignorant 
of the spherical and cyclical aspects of life. We 
erroneously refer to the “paths” of the sun and 
the moon as though, for all intents and purposes, 
the sun is in motion. Well, it is in motion, but in 
relative terms it is stationary. It does not inscribe 
a path, nor does it “rise” or “set.” The earth 
revolves. More accurately, the earth’s horizon 
rises and falls relative to the sun. Daily the fact 
that many environmental designers conceive of 
life as a two-dimensional still life, and I realize 
Figure 5.4 Mandala. Shutterstock Item ID: 
671473225. Contributor: Katika.
Figure 5.5 Yin-Yang. Shutterstock Item ID: 
1457918075. Contributor: mrjohnblack.
105
that is redundant, is reinforced by our work and 
by much of what surrounds us. In our study of 
mythologies and religions we are as limited in 
our perception of the volumetric aspects of life as 
we are in our design awareness. We rely on two-­
dimensional representations to grasp and grapple 
with life. “A geometric figure may serve the same 
purpose of harmonizing the opposites, and of 
such figures the most important is the circle or 
the mandala” (Tuan, 1974, 17) and the yin-yang 
or Tai Chi symbol. These two-dimensional figures 
represent and embody the multiple dimensions 
of life and relationships. Note Tuan’s reference 
to two-dimensional figures. One striking difference between earlier cultures recording of life 
and our current use of geometric representations 
for four-dimensional cycles is that our predecessors lived with them, where guided by them, and 
orally shared their beliefs as they learned about 
them. The dynamic spatial differences between 
primitive and modern cultures are excellently 
provided in Lera Boroditsky’s Ted Talk, “How 
Language Shapes the Way We Think” (see back 
in Chapter 2). We, however, sit at tables and work 
out our visualizations on the two-dimensional 
surfaces of paper and computer screens as if they 
are separate from us.
Even during the heyday of environmental psychology, and today’s academic and media blitz 
promoting ecological awareness, two-­dimensional 
thinking continues to be reinforced. Many environmental psychologists strengthened the foundations of design in the 1960s and 1970s. Gans 
(1962), Sommer (1969), Hall (1969; 1981; 
1983), and Downs and Stea (1973) typically 
expressed their work in plan view or as imagined 
in plan view. Ecological literature also uses plans, 
and cross sections, and the less-dimensional 
medium of graphs and charts. The presumption 
is that viewers automatically interpret plans, sections, and charts into dynamic, four-­dimensional 
environments. Their diagrams and sketches 
repeatedly represent human behavior from above 
and not from eye level where the circle becomes 
a sphere, the square a cube, the triangle a cone, 
and the ellipse an ellipsoid. This is a lot to expect 
from a designer, let alone a layperson. In addition, 
land planners see “land use character” as two-­
dimensional colored areas on a map (e.g., yellow 
represents residential land use) and not what the 
land use character looks like at eye level. So a community settled in 1845 and another a few miles 
away settled in 1962 both display the same color 
representing residential land use even though one 
is 117 years older and at eye level looks nothing 
like the newer residential neighborhoods.
Personal space refers to an 
area with invisible boundaries 
surrounding a person’s body 
into which intruders may not 
come….Personal space is not 
necessarily spherical in shape, 
nor does it extend equally in all 
directions.
(Sommer, 1969, 26)
For Hall (1969; 1983) and Sommer (1969; 1974) 
“proxemics” and “personal space,” respectively, 
are, if anything, a semisphere when we look at 
a person standing erect. Yet, the authors do not 
recognize height; therefore, the spatial nature of 
life remains two dimensional, or flat. This was 
all the more concerning when I saw the change 
that took place with my landscape architecture 
students between first and third year. A review of 
my video tapes showed first-year students miming 
the spaces they designed: walking across the front 
of the room as they described a path, lifting their 
heads as they told of the sunlight through the 
trees, lifting a foot as they stepped across a bit of 
water (Scarfo, 1989). My concern surfaced when 
I saw those same students three and four years 
later no longer miming the experiential content of 
their designs, but presenting the future life worlds 
of people through the two-dimensional language 
of geometry: axis and focal point being their 
favorites. The dangers of thinking one and two 
dimensionally are made humorously evident in 
Edwin Abbott’s Flatland (1991) written in 1880. 
Later, in 1965, certain corrections with regard 
to both the social and mathematical thinking in 
106
Flatland were made in Dionys Burger’s Sphereland. 
As professionals whose work gives form to the life 
worlds of others, landscape architects need to be 
comfortable with the fluidity of volumetric spaces 
that are people’s lives in space and time.
Proxemics is the term I have 
coined for the interrelated 
observations and theories 
of man’s use of space as a 
specialized elaboration of 
culture.
(Hall, 1969, 1)
GROUND PLANE: LIFE AS 
MOVEMENT
The other method of 
analyzing verbal landscapes 
is grounded on the concept 
and the techniques of literary 
setting. How can a place in 
which events “take place” be 
represented in the time-flow of 
language? That, in its broadest 
sense, is the problem of setting, 
and it is a problem shared 
by anyone who would render 
a landscape in language – 
explorer, naturalist, tourist, 
and literary artist alike.
(Conron, 1974, xxi)
Fiction offers us a way to counterbalance our 
tendency toward a still-life mentality. Our 
four-dimensional world is recognized by writers 
and those who study literature (Conron, 1974; 
Lutwack, 1984; Smitten and Daghistany, 1981). 
Spanning more than 300 years, John Conron’s 
analysis of American literature, poetry, and 
paintings identifies four ways in which authors 
reproduce “a coherent and detailed landscape” 
(Conron, 1974, xxii). John sought to show how 
details in literature and poetry can “be arranged 
so that they will not only accumulate, but also 
connect to each other as parts of a living picture” 
(1974, xii). His findings built upon three- and 
four-dimensional spatial relationships: fixed posiFigure 5.6 Proxemics. Drawn by author.
107
tion, physical movement, metaphoric frame of 
reference, and dominant impression.
1.	“From a fixed point of view: I stand at the eastern 
edge of a field, facing a tree in the middle of 
the field…here the landscape is organized from 
where I locate myself in terms of a coherent 
visual logic: foreground to background, left to 
right” (xxii).
2.	“…organize the landscape around physical 
movement: I walk toward the tree; wet empty 
furrows ripple under my feet; the tree balloons 
as I approach it. Movement thus energizes the 
heart of the sentence, the verb, and consciously 
or no it activates description, it suggests that 
the landscape is animate rather than just 
inertly there” (xxii).
“Two other techniques play off the visual with 
cognitive logic…” (xxii)
3.	“Landscape is arranged in terms of a metaphoric frame image: the furrows in the field are 
like corduroy; the field is a flat, slightly mussed 
piece of grayish-brown corduroy on which the 
tree sticks like a burr…” (xxiii).
4.	“…a dominant impression arranges the significant details of a landscape in terms of its effects 
on the perceiver (‘impression’ means literally 
a mark on the mind). If I am a painter or a 
hunter or a tourist, I will naturally ascribe different values to the field. If I am cold, I will 
describe the field in images which emphasize 
the chill I feel: gray light, rigidity, starkness, 
even loneliness” (xxiii).
Conron admits “there are other ways of organizing verbal landscapes, but they depend much less 
on visual than on cognitive logic” (xxiii). You will 
find Conron’s spatial analysis of literature is best 
applied later here in Chapters 7 and 8, when you 
reflect the narrative you are asked to write against 
the storyboard of that narrative you produce. 
Another beneficial activity for you to consider, as 
we get closer to thinking in narrative forms, is to 
review various cinematographic techniques, e.g., 
fade in, fade out, jump cut, and flashback to name 
a few (Beaver, 2009).
The simplest model of man's 
existential space is therefore a 
horizontal plane pierced by a 
vertical axis. On the plane man 
chooses and creates centers, 
paths and domains which make 
up the concrete space of his 
everyday world.
(Norberg-Schulz, 1980, 40)
In architecture, landscape architecture, and interior design the ground plane is the most important of the three planes. On it rests the walls, or 
vertical supports, that in turn carry the ceiling or 
frame the sky. Even so, Francis Ching’s (1978) 
way of introducing planes exemplifies a problem 
encountered by most designers wishing to learn 
about them. The floor is all too often taken for 
granted. Ching’s graphics do deal with ground 
planes and their importance in meticulous detail. 
But, the drawings and text that introduce the 
concept of plane, and precede his graphic analysis of the ground plane, deal with vertical planes. 
In the various sketches’ ground planes are left 
vague, at best. Little of the contemporary design 
literature deals with the ground plane in more 
than ambiguous terms (Downing, 1841; 1969; 
Guilpin, 1792, 1802; Repton, 1794, 1803; 
Ruskin, 1859; Vitruvius, 1960). Similarly, little 
of the design literature deals with interior rooms’ 
ceilings, often confusing them with roofs. More 
on that later.
Light gives life to a space. 
Manipulation of light and 
shade gives the urban designer 
power to transform spaces of 
stone, bitumen, and concrete 
into tapestries of sunlight 
and shadow…Intricate 
shadow patterns on pavement 
108
and building walls create 
architectural richness from even 
the crudest materials.
(Arnold, 1991, 44)
I’m not sure if there is a connection with the 
limited attention given ground planes in design 
literature, but too few landscape designers seem to 
take advantage of the potential message content 
that can be conveyed by a ground plane to the 
people walking or gathering on it. The works 
of Burle Marx and Dan Kiley come to mind 
as exceptions, along with the admission that in 
most landscape designs the planting beds do get 
a significant amount of attention. Planting beds 
are the very essence of the landscape architects’ 
design medium. Their shape typically communicates directional messages through framing.
They demarcate one area from another, and in 
doing so provide a sense of direction and enclosure. Planting beds along the edges of walks 
and gathering spaces modify a sequence of messages by directing or gathering the user-readers’ 
attention. If we think of walk, path, and plaza 
as nouns, then how their surfaces are  textured 
(scored or inlaid) and how their defining edges 
are articulated can be thought of as adjectives 
modifying their message forms and activities. As 
a homogeneous mass of brick, wood, concrete, 
or stone, any modification to the character of the 
ground plane is left to the ground plane’s patterning, or to the shadow patterns being cast on its 
surface. Shadow mosaics can give a ground plane 
a particular identifiable character that provides a 
space with a uniqueness contributing to its sense 
of place. The application of shadow patterns can 
also save money. 
[U]nexpectedly, the cost 
difference between brick and 
asphalt paving can buy enough 
Figure 5.7 Burle Marx – Portuguese stone 
pavement mosaic in the Carioca square. 
Alamy Stock Photo ID: 2HEFT4N. Credit: Donatas 
Dabravolskas.
Figures 5.8.1 and 5.8.2 Leaf shadows: left (in daylight) and right (at night under lights).  
Photos by author.
109
immediate tree cover to justify 
using the most disparaged 
material of urban civilization 
– asphalt paving – which, with 
trees, assumes the richness of a 
Spanish tile floor that changes 
with the seasons.
(Arnold, 1991, 83)
PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES
Many design students tend to take for granted the 
character of the ground. Although nature provides 
plenty of examples of ground planes from the 
seemingly level to precariously steep, many young 
designers have yet to see the possibilities in such 
variations and use them to enhance the character 
of their work. Ground planes are another design 
feature we are too close to, we have grown to take 
for granted. Individuals new to design frequently 
miss the opportunities provided by the topographic nature of the ground in that they often 
think of the ground as flat and without character. This is what I call a plan-view mentality; after 
all they are looking at a flat piece of paper or a 
flat screen. In many design projects they even go 
so far as to argue for the removal of bothersome 
topographic and vegetative features in an effort to 
begin a project on a plain plane. However, when 
asked to do a design on a flat site, those new to 
design quickly realize there is too much freedom, 
too much opportunity. There is no natural starting point around which or with which to grow 
a design. Like being asked to write something, 
anything, “Give me a sample of your writing.” 
I’m sure you have memories of staring at a blank 
piece of paper or computer screen, your mind 
wandering as it searches for a starting point –  
that first word. Even when given a topic to write 
about, students rarely ask “what’s the emphasis of 
what I’ve been asked to write on?”
Forty years’ teaching landscape architecture 
showed me that students approach writing and 
design in much the same way. So often they expect 
their first draft to be their last. No surprise, they 
also expect their first design ideas to comprise 
their final design. They miss the opportunity to 
utilize, in a sense to be guided by the topic itself, 
or what the topographical context provides every 
site design project. The narrative design process 
introduced shortly overcomes these problems. 
With guidance, you will be asked to summarize 
a site’s sense of place in terms of the likely users 
and the client’s wishes; develop a one-, two-, or 
three-page narrative of someone experiencing the 
eventual design; interpret the narrative into a storyboard; blend narrative and storyboard out loud 
to find weak spots, and move to interpret your 
storyboard into a final design.
Landscape sites offer opportunities to respond 
in a variety of creative ways. That is why designers 
learn to do inventories, to find what resources are 
available to work with and in what portions of a 
site the work may be done. Do the ground plane’s 
rolling contours suggest soft meanders, or does 
the rock-strewn bare surface indicate a harder 
colder approach to a solution that reflects the 
probable users’ expectations? How does all that 
blend with probable users’ expectations? Ground 
planes’ patterns can suggest behaviors such as 
passage through, stop, turn here. They may be 
a solid, emphatic statement, “Walk this way,” or 
orchestrated with changes in views and directions 
and rates of movement into a dance across a site. 
For an excellent example of how a designer’s work 
can control a sequence of movements and message 
gathering by a landscape participant, see the experiential description below of the Japanese Katsura 
Imperial Villa teahouse garden produced by one 
of Katherine Benzel’s students (1998, 171–178).
Benzel’s student gives us an example of the two 
most critical qualities of paths, their ability to move 
us through an unfolding sequence of bits of information and to structure the sequential nature of that 
delivery. Shared through the drawings and words of 
her former student Junko Miyata, she writes
If we visited the Katsura 
Imperial Villa built in the 
middle of the seventeenth 
century in Kyoto, our 
110
experience would unfold in 
the following manner. The 
first path to the teahouse, 
made with stones positioned 
to facilitate an easy, leisurely 
stroll is enclosed by a wall 
of trees on both sides to close 
down the view. A lantern at 
the end and stones off the path 
indicate a place for us to turn. 
As soon as we turn, the space 
opens up and we unexpectedly 
encounter a significant view 
of the teahouse across the 
pond. Since the teahouse is not 
immediately available to us, 
its appearance heightens our 
anticipation. We take another 
path to continue our journey 
around the pond. The new 
path is made of stepping-stones 
spaced far enough apart to 
require us to look down and 
concentrate on where we are 
stepping. It is harder to walk 
on this path because the spacing 
between the stones and their 
height and unevenness make it 
impossible to assume a normal 
walking rhythm. We cannot 
look around but must focus 
on what we are doing to avoid 
tripping or falling. Relieved to 
follow a stone that directs us 
off the path, we pause to view 
an island in the pond. After 
we resume the path, a thick 
white, rough, monolithic stone 
bridge stops us in our tracks. 
Considering our physical and 
mental exertion, the view 
of the teahouse right before 
us is dramatic. The bridge, 
however, appears to be out 
of agreement and scale with 
the teahouse because it is so 
raw and inharmonious. We 
walk over the pond on top of 
it, paying attention because 
it is very narrow and there 
are no railings, and again we 
are forced to think about our 
efforts. Once we step down on 
the other side, we find a water 
basin on the path near the house 
for symbolic cleansing and 
purification. The entrance to the 
teahouse is straight ahead and 
through a small high window 
that we must climb up to and 
crawl through on our hands and 
knees. Crawling into the house 
forces us to experience humility. 
The sequence of transition, 
contrast, emotion, selfawareness, and time prepares us 
for the tea ceremony.
(Benzel, 1998, 172–176)
111
A visible walking surface 
(sidewalk, path) is a 
fundamental provision for 
the promotion of pedestrian 
movement. On-site paths 
can be seen as connectors to 
off-site paths. According to 
Gibson’s (1979) ecologic theory 
of perception, “surface” is 
the provider of possibility for 
movement. Visible connections 
and walking surfaces are key 
elements in Lynch’s concept 
of legibility, in which the 
pedestrian uses visual cues to 
gain an understanding of the 
environment and organizes it 
into coherent patterns.
(Zimring et al., 2005, 189)
The ground plane is the basis, the foundation of 
a landscape design. Across the ground plane the 
interrelationship of foreground, middle ground, 
and background areas does a lot to set the stage 
for the type of experience(s) a design provides. 
Much like the grammatical format of a paragraph the reader need not even be aware of the 
paragraph’s basic narrative structure for it to be 
enjoyable or add to the reading experience. On 
the contrary though, the designer/author must 
be acutely aware of the narrative’s structure. With 
the topic sentence in first place a paragraph’s 
message is introduced or set up. Moving toward 
a landscape we refer to this as a first impression 
Figures 5.9.1–5.9.4 Drawings and description of the Katsura Imperial Villa Tea Garden are those of 
Junko Miyata from Katherine Benzel’s The Room in Context (1998, 173–175).  
Courtesy of McGraw Hill.
112
of which there may be several as the participant 
moves from one area to another. The shape of a 
ground plane greatly influences how the narrative 
is delivered.
A level plane without obstructions allows you 
to easily see where you are going. A destination 
is even more pronounced when the ground plane 
raises up toward you, unless the design is on the 
other side of the hill. With the ground plane 
raised the perspective is foreshortened, a path is 
more easily read than when it is laid out on level 
ground. The topography of an ascending ground 
plane brings our attention to the rate of message 
delivery. Generally, at a normal pace there is a 
fairly uniform rate at which the message units 
come into identifiable (readable) range. However, 
site size and character can influence the rate and 
rhythm of message delivery.
Two other factors influence the rate at which 
details occur across a given space. One is what 
Forman and Godron refer to as a landscape’s grain 
(1986, 216), and the other is the path’s context 
which adds to or diminishes the coherency and 
clarity of an evolving message. By grain, they refer 
to a landscape area covered by similar features that 
account for a coarse, medium, or fine grain. A 
mountain range, what with the “average diameter 
or area” of a mountain, is a coarse grain. A landscape of dry shrubs and small trees is a fine grain. 
A coarse-grained landscape would likely afford 
longer views, sight lines, than a fine-grained landscape.
In general terms, a landscape’s flat, concave, 
or convex form makes a difference in one’s sight 
lines and the direction in which a landscape narrative unfolds. A landscape that climbs, or curves 
upward into your field of view, presents more 
of the context (middle and background) of the 
evolving message, more quickly. A landscape 
that falls away requires you to discover the narrative as you approach the crest of the ground’s 
curvature as it reveals what is below where you 
are. Interestingly, with respect to message delivery, this kind of topography presents its messages 
from the top down.
In contrast, a concave landform allows our eye 
to sweep over more ground area more easily, more 
readily know what’s ahead, and what’s around. 
You are allowed to become more comfortable 
and spend more time identifying the immediate 
messages. Information comes not only “from the 
ground up” but also through what makes up its 
greater context. This more explicit, more open 
manner of disclosing messages typically reduces 
the need for the user-as-reader to “work” for the 
messages and eventually the narrative.
In the act of ascending a hillside or stairway, the 
physiological act of climbing is part of both the 
mood-generating and the information-­gathering 
processes. The landscape’s context is being filtered 
(or modified) by the person’s inner context, or 
state of mind. The user’s arrival at a destination 
had better be equal to the effort made to get there 
or a certain disappointment ensues. Years ago I 
was impressed by the way the act of ascension was 
used in the old Masonic Temple that was then the 
office of Sasaki, Dawson, DeMay in Watertown, 
Massachusetts. You ascended nearly three flights 
of red-carpeted stairs set between two walls. The 
first two flights, each bringing you to a landing, 
were straight. Two-thirds of the way up the stairway it took a right-hand turn. At the top was the 
receptionist’s station set in front of a large wall. 
In this case, the visitor’s destination was located 
over what would be the crest of a hill, which, in 
Figure 5.10 Message delivery sequence as you 
move toward a hillside. Drawn by author.
113
this case, was the top step. Climbing the stairs, 
the person was unencumbered with visual messages, other than the crimson red carpet at her 
feet. As she turned to climb the last flight, the 
backdrop, the receptionist, and then the counter/
desk (barrier) at the destination came into view, 
from the top down. As the visitor climbed, and 
was allowed to consider why she was there, I’m 
sure the crimson red, carpeted stairs only added 
to her arriving at her destination out of breath 
and with an elevated heart rate. She had ascended 
the heights, earned the right to speak to the 
receptionist, but at a disadvantage. Gasping for 
breath while trying to make a good impression, 
Sasaki, Dawson, DeMay and their staff, whether 
intended or not, had a certain sense of power over 
the person before she even introduced herself.
Think of the types of communication associated with straightforward dialogue and that of 
anticipation, then relate each to a representative 
ground plane. Think of the types of writers who 
would associate with each emotion and ground 
plane: mystery, poetic, meditative.
In 2006 John Simonds spoke to “abstract 
[spatial design] qualities….of a series of varying 
volumes, each designed to induce a predetermined response” (2006, 159).
Think, too, of the rate and sequence of information disclosed as we walk over a ground plane 
that curves downward, away from us. Tension is 
produced in the landscape especially when the 
obvious existence of views that can inform us of 
a destination and how to get there are blocked 
and yet to be discovered at points (times) along 
the pathway. The removal of views of your 
destination occurs when the ground plane is 
convex. In a convex landform, the ground plane 
causes people to ask for more information “up 
front.” The “falling away” of the ground plane relative to the location of the reader removes a portion  
of the topic sentence, the essence of the place over 
the horizon, hidden by the lip of the downward 
curving ground plane. As we crest a slope or stairway, background messages are typically presented 
first, then middle ground messages are presented 
as we move forward. As we move toward the peak 
of a curving landform, middle and background 
information is provided for us from the top down. 
Figure 5.11 Lines and objects indicative of 
emotions. Simonds (2006, 159). Courtesy 
McGraw Hill.
114
In a sense, information rises into view, remember, the tops of distant objects and spaces appear 
first. The upper portions of the remaining visual 
information appear first and then progress downward to the ground. If you think about this from a 
landscape point of view, the tops of tree canopies 
will be contributing to a user’s first impressions, or 
they will supplement a first impression gained by 
walking up the slope. The tightness of the plane’s 
curvature determines the distance from the viewer 
to the information that comes into view. In an 
undulating ground plane, such as sand dunes or a 
moraine landscape, information is intermittently 
presented and hidden. Warped ground planes 
also introduce the aspect of varying sightlines. A 
designer could provide bits and pieces of a narrative, the culmination of which would either 
satisfy what the landscape reader was anticipating 
or surprise them. Keep in mind, a designer-author 
could also use sounds and aromas to influence the 
reader-user’s expectations before they reach a narrative’s main visual messages.
As a regional, community, or neighborhood 
feature, a place’s predominant sightlines play an 
integral part in contributing to its local character 
and greater context. I grew up outside Boston, 
Massachusetts. Growing up I took the characteristic New England sightlines for granted. While 
vegetation was a contributing factor, the rolling 
land itself made for typical New England sightlines of one-quarter to three-quarters of a mile. 
An excellent similar example of such a landscape, 
without the tree cover, is the Palouse region of 
Washington State. Although topographically 
similar, the interesting difference between New 
England’s and Eastern Washington State’s landscapes is the absence of trees across the Palouse. 
With few trees across the Palouse, the early 
morning and late afternoon sun seems to appear 
sooner, and linger longer, and depart more 
quickly than in New England. Easterners start 
and conclude their days with lower levels of light 
for longer periods of time as the sun has to climb 
higher before it shines over and through the 
tree canopy. In a lot of the Palouse and the high 
desert of eastern Washington State, the sun is in 
your face from the moment it breaks the horizon 
to the moment it sets. In eastern Washington 
sightlines are longer than in New England and 
overlooks are broader and deeper in their panoramas. In fact, high points and overviews are 
a major feature of the eastern Washington landscape character.
Years ago, in a humorous gesture to a readily 
identifiable sense of place, someone recognized 
an aspect of Kansas’ extended, flat landscape and 
seemingly forever sightlines. That aspect became a 
bumper sticker that was divided evenly across its 
length with a horizontal band of blue resting atop 
a horizontal band of white. It read “Ski Kansas.”
Another example of people’s sense of and 
comfort with a regional landscape character 
Figure 5.12 New England village. iStock 
ID:824654196. Photo: Kirkikis.
Figure 5.13 “Palouse” Southeast Washington State. Courtesy of Spokane, WA. Photographer  
Dan Price.
115
occurred several years ago when two friends 
from the Plains States came home with me to 
Massachusetts. We arrived at night, so it wasn’t 
until the next morning that they had their first 
introduction to the limited sightlines of the New 
England landscape. For two days they were obviously uncomfortable. I could see it in their faces, 
they could feel it in their bodies. But we couldn’t 
figure out exactly why they felt so uncomfortable. When we visited the wide-open beaches in 
Ipswich and walked over the last dune to enjoy a 
view of the Atlantic Ocean we all suddenly knew 
what had been happening. They’d been fighting 
feelings of claustrophobia. The New England 
landscape’s reduced sightlines contributed to their 
feeling closed in. Once they crested the last dune 
and looked out across the ocean they could see, 
what was for them, a typical horizon at a distance 
of about three miles and foregrounded by the 
beach’s flat open landscape. Their facial muscles 
then, finally, and obviously, relaxed.
The ground plane sets the stage for a narrative. 
Whether naturalistic or modified, a landscape’s 
ground plane is an ecological composite of natural, 
cultural, and social dynamics: a place’s cultural 
geography (Yamin, and Metheny, 1996). Even the 
most built upon site is still a composite of interactive, and to a great extent, interdependent relationships between what’s built, what’s built upon, who’s 
doing the building, and who lives there using it. If 
what is built works well with the natural dynamics 
of a site and setting then it requires less maintenance than if the designed environment fights the 
local ecology. If the environment complements the 
cultural and social dynamics then less social maintenance is required in the form of laws, regulations, 
codes, and the people to enforce them. This is a 
fundamental aspect of sustainability.
Figure 5.14 SKI Kansas. Drawn by author.
 
Figures 5.15 and 5.16 Seawall, San Padre Island, Texas, 1978. The seawall reminds me of Ernest 
Callenbach’s statement, “Nature bats last.” Photos by author.
116
As presented above, within the realm of 
message delivery, the nature of the ground plane 
contributes to the landscape text’s frame of reference or setting. Whether flat and open, concave 
and enclosed, or convex and foreshortened (but 
interestingly enough with high points and long 
views), the ground plane sets the character for 
how people move across the land. On flat terrain 
the typically open views can be easily enhanced 
or diminished with the selective placement of 
vertical planes. Vertical planes either work with 
the circulation pattern provided along the ground 
plane or work against it, giving the narrative a 
message structure that contrasts the topographical character of the place. Later, as we think about 
the movement of the landscape’s reader we will 
gain a broader understanding of how ground 
planes contribute to a landscape’s narrative form 
and content.
VERTICAL PLANES
In our experiences of the built 
environment, action settings 
constitute our social worlds… 
When we enter a built 
environment, we immediately 
survey and apprehend its 
character, figuring out, usually 
with a glance what we can 
and should do, discerning all 
the norms that govern people’s 
conduct there.
(Goldhagen, 2017, 199)
With regard to narrative, vertical planes and 
upright objects provide eye-level messaging features. At eye level, vertical planes tend to fill more 
of our cone of vision. We read them in an effort 
to acquire more explicit information along our 
narrative path and as such they take on a more 
subtle, yet influential, power. Vertical planes tend 
to hold and guide our immediate attention. The 
reason is simple, as vertical planes they are in our 
face rather than at our feet. Their addition to a 
ground plane immediately divides the larger space 
so to provide the overall narrative with a sequence 
of smaller message-delivery areas. Vertical planes 
separate spaces. As foreground features, they more 
emphatically frame and direct how we may move 
about a space. They structure both flow of movement and message delivery.
Watch the person delivering the mail along 
your street. Lawns, driveways, and low planting beds are all walked through with the aim of 
traversing the shortest distance between front 
doors and mailboxes. This speaks to vertical features efficiency and their power. But, install a 
fence, or watch what happens as a wall of wild 
grasses along a property line grows to a height of 
4′ during the summer. The growth of taller vertical masses not only redirects people’s attention, if 
not movement, but also introduces a more striking demarcation of foreground, middle ground, 
background, and framing, or stage right and stage 
left. Verticals direct, enclose, and enframe. As solid 
features verticals define landscape rooms. A fun 
landscape quality to play with is how the sequence 
and character of landscape messages change over 
time. As vertical landscape features grow, they 
narrow the setting provided by a ground plane, 
intercepting our sight, taking away, as it were, the 
more distant ground plane, the narrative’s greater 
context. With regard to narrative, the segmenting of space with verticals enhances the sequential 
character of the messages being read. Since verticals can control the visual sequencing associated with a place, they can also, to a great extent, 
control the sequence in which the messages are 
read. They contribute to the message rhythm and 
comprise a lot of what we so easily call the character of a place.
In his discussion of crosssectional cut lines, Wester notes, 
“The area at or near the cut 
line is designated as foreground, 
the main message or emphasis 
117
area as middle ground, and 
the horizon or context area as 
background”.
(Wester, 1990, 65)
Interesting is the positioning of the viewer and 
the viewed to both graphic communication and 
message delivery in the landscape. While Lari 
Wester’s (1990) focus is the development of good 
graphic skills, his approach makes a wonderful 
contribution to our understanding of a landscape’s message delivery capabilities. A viewer’s 
position relative to what’s viewed is critical to 
delivering the desired message(s). Throughout 
Design Communication for Landscape Architects, 
Wester relates the viewer’s proximity to the 
viewed, the message area, scale of drawing and 
detail contained in it. Since Lari works off the 
viewer’s cone of vision all these qualities easily 
transfer to the development of message delivery in 
a landscape. Lari’s work provides an excellent, and 
fun, foundation on which to build a landscape’s 
message delivery capabilities. A good example is 
his introduction of axonometric drawings. He 
wants to be sure the student realizes “that simply 
knowing how to plot an axonometric is not the 
objective here. Learning to control and adapt 
the process for communication is the objective” 
(Wester, 1990, 79).
From the stage to the city is 
more of a leap in scale than 
symbolism. Built environment 
has the capacity to transmit 
messages which range from the 
conceptual and verbal to the 
abstract and inchoate. These 
intimations do not consist 
of objective information but 
rather reflect an internal 
mental assembly of symbols and 
images. The message can be 
‘read’ and understood because 
the mind is versed in the 
language.
(Smith, 1977, 16)
Positioned across a ground plane, vertical features 
provide more information for the reader than the 
ground alone. They increase the author/designer’s 
intended message delivery by adding detail to the 
ground plane’s message and greatly reducing the 
reader’s wandering eye. Message continuity along 
a continuum calls for the designer to give greater 
attention to syntax – a strong interrelationship 
between the media delivering the messages and 
the messages delivered. The channeling of motion 
and sensory perceptions helps align the information being perceived and interpreted. Reading 
of the text  becomes more refined and directed, 
we might say more pronounced, than that found 
 
. 
Figures 5.17–5.19 Providence Sacred Heart Hospital Healing Garden, Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
118
on an open ground plane. Vertical planes may 
restrict wandering or provide for a multiplicity 
of planned opportunities to wander about a site. 
For example, the seemingly free wandering about 
Spokane, WA’s Sacred Heart Hospital’s Healing 
Garden, was a planned part of the overall narrative. Broken up, with openings at differing intervals and heights, permeable vertical planes allow 
(even call our attention to) specific views of things 
to come. They can foreshadow destinations and at 
times the routes to be taken. Vertical planes can 
draw our attention backward, strengthening our 
sense of beginning and return. Openings in vertical planes to the sides of our line of travel enhance 
information regarding where we are, where 
we have been, and where we are going. Their 
spacing also influences the sensed rate at which 
we are moving. What they allow and disallow as 
views provide for subplots and diversions to the 
main messages along our journey, flashbacks and 
flash-forwards, reminders, and hints.
The strength of vertical planes lies in their 
ability to demarcate, divert, and direct both movement and views. While he doesn’t use the word 
plane, Lynch’s “district” is more a demarcated 
place than a thing. Although it is “conceived of 
as having two-dimensional extent…the observer 
mentally enters ‘inside of’…[this place of] some 
common, identifying character” (1960, 47). Two 
facts need to be noted with the introduction of 
Lynch’s definition. First, Lynch’s “observer” is not 
passive but an active participant in the district, 
reading and interpreting information. Second, the 
participants’ ability to enter a district calls for the 
existence of edge boundaries that are pronounced 
so one knows when thy have entered and exited. 
Or, with sightlines back to the edge, participants 
can know how far they have come into a district. 
However, Lynch goes on to note the edges need 
not be solid and can act as seams allowing movement between districts of activity areas.
In general vegetation is the 
manifestation of living reality. 
But vegetation has also forms 
which are less friendly or even 
frightening. The forest, thus, is 
primarily a “wilderness” full 
of the strange and menacing 
forces. Bachelard writes: ‘we 
do not have to be long in the 
woods to experience the rather 
anxious impression of “going 
deeper and deeper” into a 
limitless world. Soon, if we do 
not know where we are going, 
we no longer know where we 
are’. Only when the wood is of 
limited extension and becomes 
a grove, it remains intelligible 
and positively meaningful.
(Norberg-Schulz, 1980, 
25–27)
The experience of entering into a place does 
evoke the simultaneous sense of (1) having left a 
place and (2) having passed by, over, or through 
a feature of demarcation: a line of low-growing 
groundcover on both sides of a walk; an opening 
in a stone wall, a picket fence, a plaza, or an alley 
between two buildings; or under a canopy of 
trees, a bridge or trellis. In moving toward a vertical surface, fence, building facade, or hedge row 
or barrier planting, we quickly scan and read our 
options. Are there openings to move through the 
mass confronting us, or must we turn to move 
along its facade? As verticals become increasingly 
distant from our viewing position, their influences transition from that of framers of scenes 
and directors of movement to that of destination points or backdrops. At a distance they act 
more to provide hints, message seeds, as it were, 
of what’s to come or what to move away from. 
Close in they help us understand how to carry out 
those hints.
Gordon Cullen notes the framing aspect of 
verticals as “netting…the devise of framing brings 
119
the distant scene forward…into our environment” 
(1961, 39). Netting is experienced more to your 
right or left providing momentary glimpses as you 
move along a narrative progression. Remember 
the Japanese practice, shakkei, of visually bringing 
distant landscapes into a garden or borrowing the 
distant scenery (Bring and Wayembergh, 1981, 
180). In “serial vision” Cullen recognizes verticals that undulate to reveal a series of contrasts 
that bring a place to life. Serial vision enables that 
progression of a spatial sequence of messages that 
make up a place’s narrative or story.
In the case of verticals that frame distant 
scenes, the reader is more a viewer than a participant in the scene viewed. They can, but do 
not typically, walk through the framing elements 
until further along the narrative. This is echoed 
in Conron’s description of the first of four ways 
an author “produces a coherent and detailed landscape” (1974, xxii). Allowed to walk through the 
framing features – entering Alice’s mirror as it 
were – allows the design participant to cross the 
line that separates individual views, or a narrative 
of stop-action scenes, to that of a progression of 
scenes or of serial experiences, or Conron’s second 
way an author introduces the reader to a coherent 
landscape (xxii). The change from moving up to 
or passing by a framed view to moving into that 
which was previously framed shifts the reader from 
being a passive viewer/reader, as in a third-person 
narrative, to that of being an actor living the scene 
as a first-person narrative. The serial nature of an 
unfolding narrative is dealt with further in the 
upcoming subsection on volume and sequence 
of volumes and then in Chapter 8, Authoring a 
Landscape Narrative.
BASIC ATTRIBUTES
Both Hall (1969) and Ashihara (1970) relate the 
interrelationship of viewer and viewed to vision 
and eye-level views. Hall more strongly relates the 
mathematics of his proxemics to the cultural contexts in which they are applied.
Proxemics is the study of 
human use of space and 
the effects that population 
density has on behavior, 
communication, and social 
interaction. Proxemics is one 
among several subcategories 
in the study of nonverbal 
communication, including 
haptics (touch), kinesics 
(body movement), vocalics 
(paralanguage), and 
chronemics (structure of time).
(see https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Proxemics, last viewed 
March 1, 2022)
As the number of planes defining a space increases 
so does the sense of enclosure to the extent that 
eventually the space becomes enclosed. Even a 
patio surrounded on four sides by 3″ tall groundcover becomes either a stepping off platform or 
a terminus to the walkway that cuts through the 
groundcover. Such a patio area is, in a sense, a 
gathering space open to its surroundings. By contrast, an enclosed space, surrounded by solid vertical features, is inwardly focused and to varying 
degrees cut off from its surroundings. Vertical 
planes most readily eliminate the greater visual 
context of a space and to a lesser degree the audio 
and olfactory contexts. Context in this instance 
was built up prior to the landscape reader’s arrival 
at the enclosed space and to an extent may be 
maintained by surrounding scents and sounds. A 
wonderful example is Thomas Church’s residential design in, I believe, Woodside, California on 
a hillside south of San Francisco. Having arrived 
at the circular turn-around at the front of the 
house you are drawn to a narrow, cinder-surfaced 
walkway that takes you toward the side of the 
house. You walk between two tall hedges flanking 
the pathway. There is nothing to see except the 
path in front of you and the tall vegetative hedges 
immediately to your right and left. Yet, there is a 
120
quiet sound, a hint, of water. But where? You are 
given the answer through a narrow break in the 
hedge to your left. One step forward and there it 
is, a small fountain, a kind of birdbath. One more 
step and then it is gone. The enclosed walk continues around the house, finally dropping away 
as you arrive at the backyard, and wham, a panoramic view to the north, up the peninsula to San 
Francisco and the Bay Area.
AMBIANCE
Surface textures and colors mediate one’s sensed 
depth of a space. The finishes on manufactured 
materials and the leaf structure, density of overhead canopy, and color not only enhance or reduce 
a space’s ambient light but also express aspects of 
the place’s character. A place may appear airy and 
both visually delicate and light with regard to 
weight. The weight of a space, in a darker location, is typically the result of both the enclosed 
space and what is enclosing it. Dark spaces appear 
to be heavier than light ones, a dark space’s air can 
seem heavy. But, in the mid-summer heat a darker 
space is often a welcome relief: lower temperatures 
combine with less radiant energy on your skin. 
Some of both aspects can be brought together by 
manipulating a space’s enclosing planes’ surface 
textures and colors. Many urban courtyards and 
small parks receive little if any direct sun light. 
Yet, as University of Toronto landscape architecture students found in their video-taped study of 
urban spaces, a number of downtown Toronto 
spaces not receiving direct sun still showed people 
casting shadows. Sunlight was being reflected off 
adjacent buildings’ glass surfaces.
While vertical planes are readily apparent as 
landscape features, most rely on ground planes 
for support. By thinking of the ground as a foundation on which to locate plants or built objects 
is to take the opportunity to enhance a place’s 
story. By blending the message delivery capabilities of both the horizontal and vertical surfaces a 
place’s story becomes more substantive. Verticals 
also connect the ground plane with the overhead 
plane. In this way the story line is diversified and 
as a result more interesting. The cathedral-like 
presence of elms and London plane trees can 
raise you to the Heavens, while small verticals can 
bring the grandeur and beauty of clouds down to 
earth. Or, like the tea garden in Kyoto (Benzel, 
1998, 175–176), the horizontal ground plane’s 
varied surfaces require you look at your feet in 
some places and allow you to look at the garden in 
others. Working in tandem with vertical plantings 
and foreshortened and elongated views, people’s 
behaviors are choreographed in a way that directs 
them to selectively “read” a landscape’s narrative.
SETTING TO DETAIL
As a final note in the introductory ideas related 
to planes, we are continuously influenced by the 
location of planes relative to us and our reading 
of them. Designers can argue for the application of design principles to a landscape narrative 
Figure 5.20 Enclosing vertical features. Drawn by author.
121
from three points of view: the global, the local, 
and the personal. In the process of reaching out 
and acquiring information, people’s eyes scan the 
space ahead. Taking from Rubin’s theory of serial 
recall (Rubin, 1995, 176–179), a distant, panoramic body of information provides the larger 
setting of a more close-in narrative. That larger 
setting is global. As people move toward the 
global text it is constantly becoming more local. 
As we walk from one outdoor room to the next, 
along an urban street, or through a garden, we 
moment by moment review increasingly detailed 
textual information. The distant, global, information becomes increasingly specific, or local, and 
then more personal. In the act of a text becoming more detailed our message acquisition shifts 
from the ground plane to the vertical planes in 
front and then around us. As the shift occurs the 
ground plane grows in its subtlety unless it is 
broken and uneven. As stated earlier, the ground, 
or base plane, provides physical support for vertical elements that mold the form of landscape 
spaces. The extent to which it supports the eyelevel text is critical to a design being considered 
good or great. However, that support is usually 
quite subtle.
Hall’s proxemics can be used 
as a guide here in regard to the 
degree of detailed information 
that can be or is collected.
(1969, 113–129)
As long as we see the ground plane as uniformly 
unobstructed it becomes a more subtle influence 
as it becomes local to the reader. The reason is 
seen in many of the quick-production methods 
of one-point perspectives (Reid, 1987, 159–163; 
Wester, 1990, 96–99). Due to our cone of vision, 
which has a vertical span of 60 degrees, what is 
viewed without being distorted is seen beyond 20′ 
away from us. In most landscape narratives, anything closer than 20′ has already been read. What 
is close to the viewer, up off the ground, and 
inside one’s cone of vision, is what has the viewer’s 
immediate attention. Interiors are ­different. In 
most residential interiors people consciously look 
at the ground plane, particularly if its tonal character changes frequently. It is a matter of personal 
safety with regard to the potential of changes in 
heights of flooring materials or changes in elevation. If you think for a moment and react to my 
statement with, “I don’t do that.” stop and ask 
yourself why, where, and when. How are interior 
floors typically handled? Which ones do not continuously call for you to check on their being level 
and unobstructed; which do often call for your 
attention? Commercial and institutional interiors, those of churches, retail shops, and government office buildings, would fluctuate between 
the two; some having the space for the ground 
to transition between global and local, and some 
maintaining a local-personal approach to the 
delivery of narrative messages.
If you ever visit the Governor Calvert House 
in Annapolis, MD and you don’t watch where 
you’re stepping you may suddenly find yourself standing above and looking 10′ or so down 
through plexiglas flooring into an old heating 
system known as a hypocast “used for heating a 
greenhouse used to grow semi-tropical plants and 
flowers” (Archeology in Annapolis, http://www.
aia.umd.edu/calvert.html). Fascinating as it is it is 
still startling to suddenly find yourself seemingly 
standing on air.
Vertical planes can open up to you, or reject 
and push you away or cause you to angle off to the 
right or left of your line of movement. How blunt, 
Figure 5.21 Plexiglass Floor, Governor Calvert 
House, Annapolis, MD. Photo by author.
122
or in your face, the messages are rests largely on 
the plane’s shape, visual and acoustical character, 
and how it relates to the other planes around it. 
The messages are also influenced by the material of 
which the plane is made, color, texture, apparent 
density, and scale. Looking straight at the edge of 
two planes joined along a vertical edge or corner 
and spreading to your right and left places you in 
or near what Ching refers to as “a field of space” 
as it relates to the two outstretched planes (1978, 
137). The interior corner of the Vietnam Veterans 
Memorial is softened by the fact it is 125 degrees 
12 minutes. Planes joined along an edge present 
a harsher field of space than when presented by 
a single curved plane. The influence of enclosing 
planes is relative to (1) the depth and width of 
the inscribed space, (2) the height of the plane(s), 
and (3) the resulting distance-height ratio of the 
viewer to what is being viewed. More background 
can be found in Ashihara (1970) or Edward 
Hall’s “proxemics.” (1969). When you are at the 
lowest (and tallest) part of the Vietnam Veterans 
Memorial, 10 feet below the top of the wall, it is 
quite surprising how quiet it is. I remember just 
hearing birds. You’re left with the deceased veterans’ names and you reflected in their memories. 
The absence of city sounds makes the experience 
all the more solemn, solitary, and powerful.
OVERHEAD PLANES
Yi-fu Tuan provides a wonderful summary of the 
bases on which much of our interactions with our 
environments rest. 
Human time also has an 
important psychological aspect. 
Life is lived in the future – close 
as the next meal and distant 
as the next stage of a career…
one’s back is to the past and 
ahead lies the future (Tuan, 
1978, 9)…Looking up at the 
night sky is contemplation, 
for people have few practical 
reasons for turning their vision 
skyward. Since looking forward 
is habitual, people must make 
a special effort to convert 
[the sky] into an aesthetic 
experience.
(Tuan, 1978, 12)
In many reference books that deal with overhead 
planes, landscape architecture students must 
interpret what is given. Ching’s graphics beautifully depict several hundred overhead planes as 
a result of the attention he gives to the ground 
Figure 5.22 Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Shutterstock ID: 121748179. Contributor: MDart10.
Figure 5.23 Sky as an overhead plane.  
Photo by author.
123
and vertical design features in his perspective 
and elevation drawings (1978, 110–193). Even 
so, much of the potential information regarding 
overhead planes remains implied. Even in Sense 
of Unity (Ardalan and Bakhtiar, 1973), where 
the articulation of overhead features is explicitly 
dealt with, there remains a wealth of information in graphic and photographic images left for 
the reader to interpret. In that we rarely consider 
overhead planes, we are not attuned to thinking about what they have to offer. Overhead 
planes and ground planes are primarily found 
at our peripheral vision. In design that means 
they subtly influence what we see ahead of us: 
patterns above and below sandwich what is up 
ahead adding to the sense of direction, supplementing information, and complementing the 
character of the messages being read.
As the designers of environments people 
inhabit, we seem to have slipped into an apathetic 
appreciation of what’s overhead. Yet, in that so 
much of what I’ve been asked to design included 
trees, my understanding of the nature and the 
characteristics of tree canopies has always been 
an important aspect of what I considered in the 
design of a space. Although I’d like to believe that 
I don’t think that has been the case. Only in the 
latter part of my career my background in history 
and narrative form provided me with an appreciation for context or for what is, at any given 
moment, at the periphery of what I am looking 
at. Like so many designers, for many years I took 
overhead planes for granted, most likely due to 
little attention being given the design capabilities 
and principles of overhead planes in my classes 
and books. Thus far, many of those writing about 
overhead planes missed an important distinction. 
While sources do mention ceiling and sky, overhead planes are typically explored as ancillary features of walls and trees. Numerous architectural 
and landscape architectural sources refer to roof 
or roofs as though they are addressing overhead 
planes. What’s taken for granted is that a roof is 
viewed from afar, not typically experienced from 
underneath as a ceiling or overhead tree canopy 
is. Ashihara (1970) believes that unlike interior 
architectural space “delimited by three planes, 
a floor, a wall, and a ceiling,” exterior space, 
regarded as “architecture without a roof,” is 
delimited by only two planes 
– a floor and a wall; in other 
words, it is space created 
through the use of only two 
dimensions…this makes the 
floor and wall planes all the 
more important determinants 
in this type of design.
(14)
I disagree with his observation. What is overhead 
has an inescapable influence on exterior space and 
vice versa. The articulation of space at eye level 
and its sense of enclosure relate to the seeming 
height of the sky as a ceiling or overhead plane 
and how it is viewed. In the same way corners are 
implied by structures around but not enclosing a 
plaza or town square. So too the heights of vertical planes imply the proximity of a space’s ceiling. 
The 12′×12′ air shaft of a tenement house is a hole 
above which the sky-ceiling is inconsequential 
compared to that of a 12′×12′ interior courtyard 
of a one-story residence. The effect of the ground 
features silhouetting the sky is influenced by the 
makeup of the sky, its color, and characteristic 
clouds. “In general we may say that the sky is as 
Figure 5.24 Piazza del Campo, Sienna. Shutterstock ID: 1946041681. Contributor: Diego 
Mariottini.
124
large as the space from which it is seen” (NorbergSchulz, 1980, 40).
The grass was very green by the 
roads and by the streams; the 
shadows of the mountain slopes 
were very dark on either hand 
overhead, and the sky with 
snowy flanks and tips was  
high up.
(Lawrence, 2007, 123)
We climbed up the gradual 
incline for a long time. The 
slopes above became lower, they 
began to recede. The sky was 
very near, we were walking 
under the sky.
(Lawrence, 2007, 121)
In all the attention Ching (1978) gives his analysis 
of space, spatial definers, and principles of order 
that cover the 387 pages of magnificent drawings, 
only six pages are devoted to Overhead Planes 
(130–135). Of the six, the first page provides an 
excellent introduction to the nature of overhead 
planes. The remaining pages deal as much with 
roofs as they do with ceilings, and even then the 
ceiling is addressed as structure rather than design 
feature. Herb Greene’s work (1962), while aimed 
at helping us appreciate lived space, focuses on 
roofs as though they are something we live with 
by living under them. As in most of the literature, 
roofs are the focus of sculptural appreciations seen 
from a distance, not as appreciated from underneath. When under a structure’s roof we typically 
appreciate the interior space’s ceiling. Equally 
cursory attention is given by Norberg-Schulz 
(1980), although he does address the importance of the sky more than Ardalan and Bakhtiar 
(1973) and Sitte (1945). In each case their respective books’ indexes are of little help. The reader 
must go hunting. Even those who have explored 
the body metaphor seem unaware of there being 
any importance associated with what’s up and 
how high. Simonds two pages on “The Overhead 
Plane” adds detail to the work of others. While 
not addressed directly, a number of Simonds’s 
sketches, throughout Landscape Architecture, 
provide insight into the use of overhead planes 
(Simonds, 1961, 89, 111, 121, and 150–153).
It is only when we visit places 
very different from our home 
that we suddenly experience 
the sky as "low" or "high"…
seen from an extended open 
plane, the sky becomes a 
complete hemisphere, and 
when the weather is "good," its 
appearance is all-embracing 
and truly grandiose. In places 
with a pronounced surface 
relief or rich vegetation, 
however, only a sector of the 
sky is seen at a time. Space 
contracts, and the landscape 
becomes intimate or even 
constricted.
(Norberg-Schulz, 1980, 39)
Keep in mind, overhead planes are typically perceived at the periphery of our cone of vision. 
Although seen in less detail than what we, at any 
moment, are focused on, what is perceived is no 
less important to the character of a place’s main 
messages.
MACRO TO MICRO
In landscape architecture, the sky is inescapable 
and ever changing. The sky is one medium found 
on a landscape architect’s pallet, broadened when 
125
you consider daytime/nighttime, changes in 
lighting with the four seasons, and the weather. 
The myths and religions of most every culture 
connect their existence on earth with the sky 
through mountains both real and imagined as in 
the form of pyramids (Norberg-Schulz, 1980, 51) 
and the “world mountain” or ziggurat (Ardalan 
and Bakhtiar, 1973, 89), trees (Campbell, 
1974,190–194), and obelisks (Bacon, 1974). The 
sky is the earth-home’s ceiling, nurturing with sun 
and rain and chastising with lightning, hail, tornadoes, and heat. This, seemingly little considered 
design feature, has directed the life and growth of 
numerous cultures. The sky’s contents, the sun, 
moon, stars, comets, have directed people’s sense 
of time, fired their imaginations, and provided 
them with their gods. Yet, looking up is a child’s 
past time, all too often lost to adults.
This will sound strange, but clouds were seemingly not really “discovered” until the Dutch 
painters began exploring them. 
There is an evolution in our 
painting of skies and clouds 
over the last 500 years…In 
the late 1400s…clouds appear 
more as symbols of clouds 
than observed… A theatrical 
backdrop…into the 1600s…
not yet painted as a result of 
direct observation…By the 
mid 1700s…Finally, we have 
clouds that feel vaporous.
(Dunlop, 2020)
Among those who studied clouds are Ruskin 
(1859, 45–59), William Blake (in many of 
his writings and paintings), Olmsted, and the 
Hudson River School of Painters.
The practice of using trees to 
make urban spaces…[is like 
using] words, they can be 
organized to create confusion 
or poetry.
(Arnold, 1991, 47)
The intriguing, yet brief, four-paragraph introduction to “roofing” found in the Poetics of 
Gardens (Moore et al., 1988) is elaborated upon 
in Arnold’s Trees in Urban Design (1991). Where 
Moore et al. have a limited view of a landscape’s 
overhead plane, “the ceiling of the garden does 
not so readily fall within the designer’s grasp since 
its basic element is the sky” (33), Arnold recognizes the results of the interplay between the tree 
canopy and sky in the branching structure of a 
tree and its shadowed-light patterns, and the leaf 
density and magnitude of its resulting sense of 
enclosure. In combination the works of Arnold 
(1991), Moore et al. (1988), and Ashihara (1970) 
provide an introduction to the attributes of overhead planes in the landscape. The pragmatic slant 
of their views is drawn from deep within the 
being of our existence, as recognized by NorbergSchulz’s existentialist interpretation of the sky in 
various landscapes (1980).
In the desert areas of North 
Africa and the Near East, 
the cloudless blue sky gives 
emphasis to the infinite 
extension of the land…[on] 
the plains of Northern Europe, 
instead, the sky is usually “low” 
and “flat”…and the feeling 
of being under an embracing 
dome is usually absent.
(Norberg-Schulz, 1980, 40)
Three types of overhead planes define outdoor 
spaces: manufactured, vegetative, and the celestial as it is framed by either manufactured objects 
or vegetation. Manufactured overhead planes are 
126
those of wood, plastic, plaster, steel, and the like. 
Their potentials as designed forms and articulated 
finishes are found in a wide variety of sources not 
because they get explicit attention as overhead 
planes but because their part in shaping and unifying space is inescapable.
As features critical to capturing borrowed 
scenery (referred to as shakkei), Itoh presents the 
importance of the overhead eaves of the main 
building of the Jiko-in garden as more important 
than the posts of the verandah. He describes the 
need for the overhead eaves in recognizing that 
their absence “would allow too much of the sky to 
be seen, thus the view of the plain would degenerate into nothing more than a commonplace sight” 
(1981, 47). Itoh’s multiple references to the posts, 
and the absence of photographs of the framing 
eaves, allow the reader to too easily miss the role 
overhead planes do play in spatial design and in 
landscape narratives.
All three types of overhead planes are characterized by the physical attributes of height, space, 
density of structural members, opacity or translucence, and the degree to which they contribute a sense of scale of actual or perceived space, 
shadow patterns, sound, ambient light and temperature. The character of an overhead plane that 
results from the interplay of these attributes adds 
to or detracts from the continuity and flow of a 
landscape narrative at eye level. This realization 
becomes all the more critical as we admit to how 
little attention designers give to what is happening overhead. In buildings, and more so outdoors, 
ceilings are not “relatively free of the functional 
restrictions that are the natural lot of the floors 
and walls…” (Moore et al., 1988, 33). Tree canopies, as outdoor ceilings, typically contribute 
to the ambient light and shadow patterns on the 
ground. Those patterns can either complement 
Figures 5.25.1–5.25.3 Overhead tree canopy densities. Photos by author.
Figure 5.26 The sunlit intersection up ahead 
signals cross traffic. Photo by author.
127
or contradict the landscape narrative as expressed 
through the verticals. The interjection of dramatic 
increases of light at intersecting paths and roads 
throughout the older parts of New England and 
the Mid-Atlantic States calls out to people using 
the heavily shaded paths or roadways. As, in a 
sense, the light at the end of the tunnel illuminated 
intersections and gathering areas, also signal destinations, and eventual arrival; changes in lighting can warn pedestrians and bicyclists of cross 
traffic ahead (personal safety): be alert a decision 
is coming up, better slow down (reorientation). 
Changes in the height, span, and density of structural members (tree canopy’s leaf density) can also 
communicate the above messages. Indoor and 
outdoor narratives in which attention is not given 
overhead planes potentially contribute to disorientation, missed decision points in a journey, 
and dangerous situations. The unplanned crisscrossing of light and dark patterns is the objective 
of camouflage, the breaking up of edges to hide 
the outlines of objects that tell a story someone 
doesn’t want told.
The arrangement of trees in 
definite purposeful patterns 
enlivens spaces. Our habit 
of considering geometric 
composition as static comes 
from the limitations of twodimensional representation in 
drawings. Moving through a 
space, what appears in plan as 
a static row or grid, becomes 
a rhythm sprung from tree 
trunks and provides a visual 
syncopation that improves 
human comprehension of the 
space, just as metrical form 
in poetry guides measurement 
and understanding. The effect 
is also like a kaleidoscope with 
each twist compounding a fixed 
number of elements.
(Arnold, 1991, 44)
Overhead vegetative planes are either a continuous or broken blanket of branches, twigs, and 
leaves. To varying degrees the sky is filtered out 
depending upon the trees included in a design 
and where they are in their growth to mature size 
and spread. Overhead, sky planes are situations 
in which the sky is framed and seen as a complete entity. Sky planes depend upon the dimension of the openings in a tree canopy. Arnold 
(1991) provides the best information and direction in the organization of both vegetative and 
sky planes. His primary focus is the appropriateness of tree size to setting and intended effect. 
His conviction, backed up with photographs, 
is that the wonder of urban spaces relies on 
the use of large trees planted closely together. 
Unlike many authors his arguments are made 
from and refer to eye-level observations. Sitte 
(Collins and Collins, 1986) also works from 
eye-level observations, which is to his credit, 
but he’s most attentive to buildings’ facades and 
to the ground planes that they surround and 
enclose. Arnold justifies his eye-level approach 
by noting the need to avoid being caught up in 
thinking in plan view: “…because of their ineffectiveness in conveying three-­dimensional character…design and planting plans nearly always 
give the impression that trees are visual barriers 
at eye level because of the way the tree crowns 
are shown superimposed solidly on the ground 
plane” (Arnold, 1991, 74).
From an eye-level perspective Arnold also 
states, and I’m sure to the glee of architects, that 
“good architecture should not be softened or 
hidden by plants, but should be reinforced and 
sometimes embellished. It is not the nature of our 
cities and urban buildings to be soft” (Arnold, 
1991, 41). Within a narrative approach to design, 
Arnold’s generalization bears questioning, especially with the increased attention being given 
the benefits of green environments on the health 
128
and well-being of hospital patients and staff, children with autism or ADHD, and longevity of the 
elderly (Amick et al. 1995; Kearns and Gesler, 
1998; Sternberg, 2009). Research findings from 
Asia, Europe, and North America show that the 
softening of environments through the introduction of greenery benefits the health and well-being 
of all age groups (Kuo and Taylor, 2004). Such 
environments also positively influence those who 
are autistic and enduring the trials of dementia 
and Alzheimer’s (Jauchius, 2017).
Indicative of an overhead vegetative plane is 
its continuous mass; depending upon the trees 
selected the canopy appears in varying degrees of 
solidity. What I refer to as a sky plane is found 
when tree canopy and building, or buildings, 
frame an overhead view of the sky. A vegetative 
plane is characterized by the following:
1.	Continuity over circulation routes (pathways 
or roads) or over gathering areas (plazas and 
courtyards): over both linear and rectilinear 
areas “trees in their best use reinforce, articulate, add scale, and subdivide these spaces” 
(Arnold, 1991, 49).
As you drive the older portions of Prince Frederick 
County, Maryland you know when a small commercial area is up ahead. All the older roads have 
continuous overhead tree canopies. Retail areas 
tend to have buildings up along the sidewalk and 
no trees. As a result, you see a brightly illuminated 
area in the shaded roadway up ahead. Similar 
landscapes are found on Cape Cod.
2.	Enclosing space from above: here canopy 
height above the ground is important. An 
arcade of tall pines with branching starting 
40′ or 50′ overhead provides a cathedral-like 
space, while the lower more horizontal branching of Honey Locust provides a more homey, 
personalized space. Thoughtfully manipulated, 
a tree’s canopy provides each landscape with 
“a scale that is sympathetic to the movement 
and perception of the pedestrians” (Arnold, 
1991, 37). An additional benefit, depending 
on the canopy’s density, is that the temperature can be 5–10 degrees cooler than adjacent 
sunlit spaces. In the heat of a Georgia summer, 
the difference is readily felt as you walk from 
the older to newer part of the University of 
Georgia campus in Athens, Georgia.
3.	Sense of depth: overhead enclosures provide 
a sense of depth through more than just the 
density of a trees’ branch and leaf structures. A 
combination of tree species provides numerous 
plantations throughout the South with a most 
dramatic spatial orchestration. At Rosewood, 
in St. Amant, LA, the massive Live Oaks are 
under-planted with smaller, yet full sized, 
trees. The rhythm of ascending and descending spaces is a tapestry worthy of contemplation. This “space within a space,” as Arnold 
refers to it, also occurs across a horizontal area. 
“Bryant Park in Manhattan is a good example 
of trees used to define an outdoor room in a 
way that complements the architectural mass 
of the New York Public Library…the branching height in the center of the grove is 25 to 30 
feet above the ground, though branches at the 
edges of the grove hang down to within eight 
feet of the ground” (Arnold, 1991, 49).
4.	Lighting: light levels relate to leaf density and 
height of crown, 
light gives life to a space… 
[and] gives the urban designer 
power to transform spaces of 
stone, bitumen and concrete 
into tapestries of sunlight 
and shadow…Intricate 
shadow patterns on pavement 
and building walls create 
architectural richness from even 
the crudest materials.
(Arnold, 1991, 44)
…the cost difference between 
brick and asphalt paving can 
buy enough immediate tree 
129
cover to justify using the most 
disparaged material of urban 
civilization – asphalt paving – 
which, with trees, assumes the 
richness of a Spanish tile floor 
that changes with the seasons.
(Arnold, 1991, 83)
5.	Tree crown: height of a tree’s crown and its 
leaf density influence the sense of depth in the 
mass of the overhead plane; that is whether it 
feels light or heavy, oppressive or comfortable.
The Honey locust, which is 
valued most in summer for its 
light shade, is least effective 
when not in leaf because of 
a naturally sparse branch 
structure. It is a tree that, 
when small, almost disappears 
in winter. The Horse  
chestnut, a tree used in many 
of the formal spaces in  
Paris, has one of the  
most effective winter forms, 
because of its thick twigs 
organized in a provocative 
symmetry.
(Arnold, 1991, 83)
Note: a tree that “disappears in the winter” may 
be exactly what a particular design calls for.
Trees provide more benefits to 
more people per dollar cost than 
any other material used in the 
construction industries. Costs of 
general building construction 
rose by more than 100 percent 
in the decade between 1968 
and 1978. In this same ten 
year period, the installation 
cost of a tree in a city increased 
between 25 and 30 percent…
the value of the same tree [then] 
continues to increase after 
installation, when all other 
materials depreciate.
(Arnold, 1991, 119)
In urban settings, the act of bringing “down to 
earth” the overhead plane with vegetative canoFigure 5.27 What shadow patterns do for asphalt. Photo by author.
Figure 5.28 Allee of Linden trees line a tree 
lined footpath through park. Shutterstock ID: 
632149790. Contributor: dugdax.
130
pies introduces a pedestrian or human scale to 
urban canyons. Vegetative canopies or allées over 
urban sidewalks provide a transition from the scale 
of interior living space to that of outdoor spaces 
that allow people to remain comfortable within 
the scale of the walkway. A swath of light down 
a roadway, as echoed in the overhead opening 
between rows of street trees, reinforces the linearity 
of an environment devoted to circulation, therefore 
reinforcing the idea of movement with direction.
As an overhead plane, the sky encloses urban 
open spaces edged with (or bounded by) buildings or trees. In both linear and rectilinear spaces, 
the dimensions of the open space, the height of 
the bounding objects, and the position of people 
relative to edge features are all important factors. 
Hall (1969), Ashihara (1970), Arnold (1991), 
and Sitte (Collins and Collins, 1986) give us 
parameters that guide our design of open space 
experiences. Each echoes aspects of the other’s theories: Halls’ proxemics, Ashihara’s 1/10th theory, 
Sitte’s principles from picturesque paintings, and 
Arnold’s critical observations. Each author’s analysis is based on “observations,” and their respective analyses are derived from the physics of the 
human eye’s cone of vision.
MECHANICS AND DESIGN
So much of the influence of ground, vertical, and 
overhead planes relates to the visual information provided us through our eyes. To be more 
precise, our cone of vision. Our bioptic field of 
vision is considered a cone, elliptical but still cone 
shaped with a vertical span of 60 degrees and a 
horizontal sweep of close to 180 degrees. With 
eye level always being the same as, or in alignment with, the horizon, the vertical sweep of our 
vision inscribes about two-thirds or 40 degrees of 
area above the horizon line and one-third or 20 
degrees of area below it.
If part of the sky area is to be 
brought into the field of view, 
one can see a building as whole 
at an angle of 27 degrees [of 
the 40 degrees above eye level] 
when D/H=2 (D being the 
distance from the building to 
the observer and H being the 
height of the building).
(Ashihara, 1970, 42)
According to Ashihara, the critical point at which 
the quality of exterior space radically changes is 
at D/H=1. At D/H=1 the cross-sectional space 
between two buildings still provides us with a 
sense of balance between building height and 
open space. As the ratio becomes larger than one, 
the space becomes greater, to the point that at 
more than 4 “the mutual interaction [between the 
building and the space it defines] begins to dissipate” (43). Less than one leads to people feeling 
closed in, potentially contributing to a sense of 
claustrophobia.
These dynamics are interesting for two reasons. 
First, Ashihara’s spectrum of feelings from claustrophobia through balance or comfort to a sense 
of standing apart is related to apparent sky-plane 
heights. If, as he says, when 27 degrees of the 
upper portion of our cone of vision provides for 
comfortable views of buildings, then a comfortable amount of sky is what is seen in the remaining 13 degrees. This places the upper edge of the 
vertical surface defining a sky plane at a 40-degree 
angle from the viewer. Second, if that is the case, 
then, when situations dictate open spaces between 
buildings of heights that result in a D/H greater 
Figure 5.29 Cone of vision. Courtesy, the Art 
Department, Brigham Young University-Idaho
131
than 1 trees, or other overhead planes, could be 
used as intermediary comforters that “give urban 
spaces a sense of scale…to connect and extend 
the geometry, rhythms, and scale of buildings 
into the landscape” (Ashihara, 1980, 22) and 
heighten the spatial expanse situations where 
D/H is less than 1, the sky plane recedes. More 
and more you sense you are in a hole as the space 
between the vertical walls “tightens.” The use of 
street trees in dense urban settings introduces a 
vegetative overhead plane that can, in screening a 
building’s mass, reduce the sense of being closed 
in by walls. Urban street trees bring the perceived 
height to width ratio of the now tree-canopied 
human space into balance. This balance with the 
use of vegetation also works to soften the audio 
character of the space. In such spaces I would 
heed Arnold’s frequent call for us to return to 
using larger rather than smaller street trees, even 
in tight spaces (Arnold, 1991, 59). On a field trip 
in an urban setting of D/H ratio less than 1, a 
student of mine commented, “I feel comfortable 
here with my friend the tree.”
When viewing a space from the 
ground, there is a [comfortable] 
feeling of enclosure when the 
surroundings are tall enough 
to intercept our entire cone 
of vision. A convenient rule 
Figure 5.30 Human field of vision. Courtesy Tara et al. (2021).
Figure 5.31 Sensed enclosure – alleyway experience of enclosing walls vs. comfortable plaza or 
patio vs. limited to no sense of enclosure. Drawn by author.
132
of thumb is that the observer 
should not be further away 
from the defining edge than 
three times the enclosure height.
(Arnold, 1991, 59)
According to Ashihara a space-to-height ratio of 3:1 
works well when you wish a building to be seen “as 
part of a group” (Ashihara, 1970, 42). If this is the 
case, then a mass planting that provides a comfortable sense of enclosure is one that is part of a larger 
“picture” and takes up about 18 degrees of your 
field of vision. Of interest here is the recognition 
that Ashihara’s ratios are only related to buildings 
and their intervening spaces. He fails to note that 
a 3-to-1 ratio could mean a person is backed up to 
a vegetative wall or under a tree canopy that is in 
fact located in a larger space, a space that Ashihara 
would note at an even greater ratio.
BRINGING THE PLANES 
TOGETHER
…the apparent clarity or 
‘legibility’ of the cityscape. 
By this we mean the ease 
with which the parts can 
be recognized and can be 
organized into a coherent 
pattern.
(Lynch, 1960, 2)
Whichever of the three types of planes we start 
with in the authoring of a landscape text, the 
important factors are that the text makes sense, 
that there be a continuity struck between the 
locations and relative positions of information 
delivery, and that narrative form can be readily 
identified and properly interpreted by the reader 
(Lynch’s “legibility”). This idea is helped by 
writing a first- or second-person narrative. Again, 
the fact your written narrative is through a person’s 
or people’s eyes greatly contributes to continuity 
in message delivery. The connection between narrating a person’s experiences and the continuity 
of the landscape is almost a natural outcome of 
writing a first- or second-person narrative. If your 
narrative is disjointed, erratic, and confusing then 
you’re approaching Alice in Wonderland, and just 
maybe that is what you want. But even then, there 
are limits. Go too far, negate a continuity across 
your messages, and the result is chaos.
…a paragraph often 
corresponds to a major unit 
in the material treated. Such 
a paragraph may take up 
one limited aspect of a scene, 
outline a step in a process, 
recount a self-contained 
episode, or recreate a mood. 
It will only derive its unity 
from orderly presentation of 
significant detail. Often the 
sequence of details is inherent 
in the subject matter. Thus a 
paragraph may trace structural 
or geographic relationships 
(spatial order), follow the order 
of events in time (chronological 
order, or proceed from causes to 
effects (order of causation).
(Guth, 1961, 145)
The development of a comprehensive narrative, 
a process dealt with in Chapters 7 and 8, calls 
design principles into play. While their application to the design of an environment structures 
a logic read through our senses, their application 
to a narrative, to messages and their sequence, 
structures the landscape’s story and discourse and 
contributes to what we read and interact with as 
landscape users in particular environments.
133
The ground, or base plane, physically supports 
the vertical elements that give form and sequence to 
landscape spaces that fill most of our cone of vision. 
The strength of the vertical forms rests in the fact that 
they are encountered at eye level. Manufactured or 
natural, verticals can display a wide variety of characteristics: (1) as solid planes they may be opaque, 
translucent, or transparent; (2) as perforated planes 
they may have small to large “openings,” some 
affording peeks and glimpses while others allow 
larger views (broader panoramas); (3) in form they 
may be uniformly flat or undulating, rhythmically 
repetitive or a fine, coarse, or broken texture across a 
landscape; (4) the planes’ surface textures vary with 
their composite materials and the finishes of those 
materials, e.g., teak vs. exposed aggregate concrete 
or a vegetative wall. Textures have the possibility of 
being visual and tactile and as green walls, aromatic.  
Keep in mind such textures are complemented 
by temperature, and sound, if not also scents and 
colors. Texture related to the surface a plane may 
also involve the shadows and reflections cast by 
those planes; (5) surface colors also work to highlight, diffuse, bring closer, and recess; (6) surface 
depth, the “density or transparency of trees in leaf…
is a function of branch height, spacing, and most 
importantly, tree type” (Arnold, 1991, 87). Two 
basic kinds of leaf arrangement: monolayered (“most 
of the leaves in a single layer are distributed around 
the periphery of the crown”), multilayered (leaves 
are more uniformly distributed in layers throughout the crown). The latter tends to cast more dense 
shade (Arnold, 1991, 87); (7) a vertical plane’s 
height, the extent to which it fills our cone of vision, 
relates to factors of size and distance from viewer. 
The best understanding of this is gained by playing 
with Wester’s (1990) or Reid’s (1987) perspective 
techniques; and (8) the position of a plane, on grade, 
suspended in the air, or at or below eye level, as they 
influence movement, views, and air circulation.
At every instance there is more 
than the eye can see, more than 
the ear can hear, a setting or a 
view wanting to be explored. 
Nothing is experienced by itself, 
but always in relation to its 
surroundings, the sequences 
of events leading up to it, the 
memory of past experiences.
(Lynch, 1960, 1)
Figures 5.32.1–5.32.3 Vertical planes helped with vegetation – (left and center) walkway between 
parking garages; (right) parking lot, Cathedral of Our Lady of Lourdes, Spokane, WA.  
Photos by author.
134
Like a planar surface making up a room or 
landscape, a paragraph is a subunit of a greater 
narrative. It “tends to be a logical, rather than 
typological, unit. It reflects the way the writer has 
sorted out and organized material” (Guth, 1961, 
142). As a subunit of a greater context a vertical 
plane or sequence of planes contributes to a more 
detailed narrative. Such design features serve an 
additive purpose, they enhance the developmental logic of both the progression of defined spaces 
moving across a landscape and to the sequence 
of people’s experiences. In one setting, gravel 
placed in a walkway would appear to be more 
of a construction or sidewalk repair project than 
something that belonged there. Experientially, 
the placement of the gravel would likely break 
up people’s movement about the space, slow their 
pace, and demark a location through the new 
sound underfoot.
With the coming together of ground planes, 
vertical planes, and overhead planes, we begin to 
piece together increasingly coherent spatial contexts leading to defined volumetric spaces. When 
there is a coherent orchestration of the physical 
characteristics of each of the three planes, when 
they work harmoniously, we are (1) presented 
with information of a uniform character that (2) 
gives designer-as-author determined direction 
through the prevailing narrative and (3) provides 
the user-as-reader with a sense of coherency and 
continuity. There is, for the user, a bundle of 
anticipated experiences that occur with a high 
degree of sequential logic.
The sequential units of information and direction in which they occur influence the user-asreader on two levels, physical and emotional. In 
that the most readily observed messages express 
functional information, you interpret the information as it relates to the size, shape, and maneuverability of yourself and any associated bags, 
packages, children in tow, and vehicles. The 
character of the message units, their adjectives 
and adverbs, their finishes and craftsmanship, 
gives position to our greater contextual sense of 
geographical place and historical time, and give 
form to our more immediate sense of well-being, 
self-confidence, and a range of emotions (gaiety, 
consolement, affection, and more). A place’s 
detailed finishing touches help a narrative work 
within the local ambiance or atmosphere that 
contributes to the design’s sense of place and the 
participant’s sense of being in that place.
As a component of a landscape’s developmental logic, that is, the progression of its message 
parts leading to a particular conclusion, planes – 
like paragraphs – call into play a logic associated 
with such design principles as harmony, repetition, gradation, radiation, concentration, contrast, anomaly, and more (Wong, 1972). The idea 
of cohesion found in each of these design principles begins with the very physics and ecology of 
a landscape’s planar surface. The elemental parts 
that make up a plane need to work together to 
sustain the integrity and character of the surface. 
As a physical feature, a landscape works within 
the parameters set by what is below and to the 
sides.
Doug Way’s Terrain Analysis (1973) remains a 
classic expression of the interconnectivity that is 
ecology: a surface’s parent or subsurface material 
gives rise to soil composition, the area’s drainage 
patterns, the plants that will likely grow in that 
soil, and the animals most comfortable living in 
the particular plant communities. A soil’s granular makeup, in turn, determines the potential 
maximum slope or angle of repose to its related 
landforms: “the limiting steepness beyond which 
soil grains will slip downhill” (Lynch, 1971, 161).
What falls on the ground also works within 
certain physical parameters. Most simply stated, 
rain on flat ground puddles and visually covers 
an area (basically a two-dimensional form). Rain 
falling on sloping ground runs off and visually 
forms streams, rivulets, and other linear features. 
The ecology of vegetative planes also relates to a 
soil’s physics, solar exposure, and to the horticultural kinship of particular plant communities. 
There are ecological, as well as design principles 
to be addressed and employed.
The continuity of thought and 
subject matter in a unified 
paragraph is often reflected in 
135
recurrent terms: the repetition 
or paraphrase of key words or 
phrases….
(Guth, 1961, 144)
The application of design principles to a place’s 
messages and meanings enhances or detracts 
from the ease with which the messages are read 
and understood. For example, imagine yourself 
approaching a designed landscape you never experienced before. Its vocabulary is unfamiliar. The 
designer of a unique environment has a choice. The 
uniquely different place can challenge the visitor, 
provide little introduction to the new landscape 
vocabulary, and have the visitor feeling confused, 
maybe even lost (see Lynch, 1960, 4). Without 
having provided the space and time in the design’s 
approach to enable people to become acclimated, 
they likely feel disoriented, confused, and probably 
anxious as they work their way toward and through 
the new environment. Or, the design can gradually 
introduce new landscape vocabulary features in 
ways that allow the participant to experience and 
learn and read the new messages, thus feeling more 
comfortable in a new setting.
A close look at well-designed advertisements 
provides wonderful insight into how design principles are applied to the introduction and growth 
of messages. Blatant word messages are supported and reinforced by more subtle messages: 
precisely chosen words, subtle color palette, textures, shapes and orientations of the objects all 
in support of the main message which often isn’t 
even stated: “Buy Me,” “Use My Service,” “Tell 
Everyone About Us.”
Look at one or two landscape and interior 
spaces you take for granted. What do the spaces’ 
messages say? Are the spaces’ messages conveyed 
and supported as well as the messages are in 
advertisements? Is the floor pattern echoed in or 
contrasted by that of the ceiling? Do the shadow 
patterns work with the finish on your patio or 
sidewalks? Good examples are found in certain 
of A.J. Downing’s country houses, a ceiling 
pattern in a library echoes that of the parterre 
garden outside the library (Downing, 1969, 
399, 185). When standing in the library, what 
you see from eye level in the lower portion of 
your cone of vision is reinforced by what you see 
in the upper portion. What is the message conveyed by the parterre garden: authority, control, 
current or past aesthetics? And how does the 
narrative from the library (intellectual authority) unfold as you move to the parterre garden 
(control over nature)? Take time to analyze the 
messages found in a place in which you feel comfortable, and then in a place in which you feel 
uncomfortable. Your findings should illuminate 
a lot regarding the messages authored and the 
messages read. In advertisements the character of the product to be sold and the targeted 
clientele drive the design principles applied to 
the visuals and the sounds (background music) 
more so than the utility or need for the product 
itself. There is little that is attractive about a face 
covered with soap suds but convey it through 
growing gradation of flowing rhythmic motions 
of a provocative human nature and accompany 
it with equally provocative sounds reaching a 
crescendo and now you got something worth 
running out to buy. Well, at least a lot of people 
are left thinking that.
The setting of a stage is but one 
aspect of the extended dialog 
between body and building…
Upjohn’s Connecticut State 
Capitol…corridors, halls, and 
stairways are faceted with 
body-sized articulations that 
welcome our presence….invite 
cozy leaning. Niches and bays 
occur on landings and in halls 
so that intimate groups can 
gather.
(Bloomer and Moore, 
1977, 70)
136
Great examples of design principles in action 
are also found in the cemeteries and the town 
halls of New England or the county-seat buildings of the Mid-west. Like paragraphs of varying 
length, intonation, and function, the introduction, rhythm, and gradation of planes introduce a place and help us transition from one 
place into another. In the case of a town hall, 
or county seat, we move from commercial to 
institutional, or from the privacy of our car to 
the public environs of the seat of government 
and, if we are lucky, or maybe unlucky, eventually into an elected official’s private chambers. 
This sequence typically moves along a spectrum 
from the publicly grand to the intimately personal; monumental planes inescapably define 
large spaces, which transition to increasingly 
personal-sized planes and spaces. This gradation 
is likely accompanied by a sequential shift in size 
and finishes of the planes.
The old Governor’s Mansion 
does have stairs and waste[d] 
space, which is precisely why 
it remains the kind of house 
in which sixty adolescent 
girls might gather and never 
interrupt the real life of the 
household.
(Didion, 1979, 71)
The finish of a plane’s surface is critical. Contrast 
the sensual qualities of the materials and spaces 
defining older seats of government with that of 
almost prison-like character of Boston’s “award 
winning” City Hall (late 1960s). Boston’s City 
Hall spaces still echo the spatial transition seen 
in the older government buildings and their surrounding spaces, but the surface colors and finishes 
of the experience are cold and ­impersonal – rough 
brushed, gray concrete – not the warmth of wood 
and brick and the personal size of both interior 
and exterior spaces. The importance of the surface 
of such planes was strikingly evident for me at a 
recent AIDS Quilt display. The very same convention hall space went, within a 12-hour period, 
from an environment of echoing voices and 
squeaking pushcart wheels to a solemn, spiritually silent place where even with 500 hundred 
people walking about you could have heard a 
pin hit the floor. The activities associated with 
dimensioning the gray concrete floor and laying 
out the walkways reflected a dramatically different 
meaning-full environment than did that reflected 
in the brightly colored quilt panels that expressed 
hope, love, a devotion to life, and works to absorb 
sound.
I’m tempted, at this point, to steal from Gene 
Rodenberry and conclude this chapter with “Space, 
the final frontier….” Dealing with space as volume, 
or even more so as a series of volumes, brings us 
another step closer to better understanding serial 
vision as the four-dimensional world in which we 
live and are aided by the sequential messages that 
flow across space and time to become narratives. 
6
Volumes and Volumetric 
Spaces
T
welve years before the Americans with 
Disabilities Act was first drafted (1986), 
I found myself, during a New England 
winter, learning how to get about with a pair of 
crutches. In 1974, my sensitivity to indoor and 
outdoor spaces heightened daily as I learned to 
carry books, drawings, groceries, and the like. I 
was also, at that time, working to identify a thesis 
topic for my Master’s in Landscape Architecture. 
My impairment and my search came together in 
my thesis, “Gray Matter: designing for the physically handicapped.”
Back in the 1970s I was learning, as Benzel 
notes, 
To design living environments 
that go beyond one moment in 
the story and reach life in the 
present while harmoniously 
connecting it to fulfillment 
in the future…[I was also 
learning] designers must 
develop a sense of spatial 
progression, perceiving design 
as an odyssey (a long series of 
adventures and experiences) as 
well as a specialty.
(Benzel, 1998, 4)
Yet, at the time, many designers thought as Thiel 
did in the 1960s and 1970s, “Space experience in 
the broadest sense is a biological function, necessary to the continual adaptation of any organism 
to its environment for the purposes of survival” 
(Thiel, 1961, 35). Contrary to Thiel, and many 
others’ thinking I thought the environment 
should be adapted to people’s “purposes of survival” and not the other way around. I look back 
now and see how my early, and very conscious, 
efforts to “read” built environments continued to 
influence my emerging attention to the narrative 
content of landscapes.
What environmental designers see on paper or 
a computer screen and so often refer to as space 
is only two dimensional. Two-dimensional features represent area. Environmental spaces are 
three dimensional or what we call volumes. Space 
for those who design private residences, public 
open spaces, business structures and surroundings, walkways, and mixed-use developments is 
volumetric space. Volumetric space is that four- 
dimensional world in which people move about 
living out their daily lives, animals roam, birds fly, 
and fish swim.
Figure 6.1 West entry to Duncan Garden, Manito Park, Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-7
139
140
[The structure’s wall] has 
however a window, an opening 
which makes us experience the 
inside as a complement to the 
outside.
(Norberg-Schulz, 1980, 9)
Volumetric space is difficult to deal with. Our 
attention is too often drawn to the horizontal 
and vertical features that define a space more 
than to the three- and four-dimensional volumes 
that are the spaces themselves. Yet, the spaces in 
which we exist are the fundamental medium 
with which designers construct and through 
which they give character to our personal, social, 
and cultural environments. In those environments the visual and topographic stability of 
ground planes, the opacity and scale of vertical 
planes, and the degree or sense of enclosure of 
overhead planes as objects are what hold our 
attention and guide our movement. Volume, as 
four-dimensional space, is what isn’t there and 
yet it is what is, at least, as important to the 
success of a design as the defining objects, if not 
more important. As Lao Tzu wrote in verse #11 
in the Tao Te Ching, 
with a wall all around/a clay 
bowl is molded/but the use of 
the bowl/ will depend on the 
space/in the walls of the void. 
So advantage is had/ from 
whatever is there/but usefulness 
[in what we make] rises from 
whatever is not [there].
(1955, 63)
What we make useful in landscapes, architectural 
structures, and their interiors is volumetric space 
or, being even more definitive, experiential volumetric space. Movement toward, around, into, 
and through volumes of space involves not only 
the aspect of time (the fourth dimension) but 
also our existence as we live life from moment to 
moment and step by step.
Our existence is accommodated as space-time 
(an area of geographical studies) in all the forms 
we give it: the apparent directional character of 
linear volumes and the apparent gathering power 
of compact volumes, e.g., as the plaza surrounding a fountain or a backyard patio gathering 
friends for a BBQ. It is, at this time, important 
to recall Henri Lefebvre’s recognition of space as 
a social product both formed and informed by 
people’s values, meanings, and practices (1979; 
1994; Moreno, 2012). Landscape architecture is 
the blending of Lefebvre’s recognition of space as 
a social product and Simonds’ recognition that 
spaces exist to provide us with life experiences. 
Taken together, landscape architecture plays a 
vital role in the social production of experiential space. Recognizing landscape spaces as social 
products makes the subjective door into environmental design much easier to open. Lefebvre’s 
work and that of his critics allow landscape 
architects to readily balance the objective and 
subjective, physical and social, sciences. Lefebvre 
and many more authors noted throughout The 
Analogy contribute to our deeper understanding 
and appreciation for “the art and science” that is 
landscape architecture.
The languages employed in the development of 
environmental designs (landscape, architecture, 
and interior design) both form and inform how 
designers come to think of, and appreciate, the 
portions of the world to which they give form, 
content, and character. Throughout the preceding 
Figure 6.2 Thinking spatially with pop-up 
books. Amsterdam Holland City Skyline. Shutterstock: ID: 1544575148. Contributor: ShustrikS.
141
discussion of points, lines, and planes, even when 
considered as discrete objects, a sense of volume, 
particularly volumetric space, has been unavoidable. We know the spaces we design are a composite of four dimensions that accommodate people, 
animals, insects, vehicles, and dynamic ecological 
systems. Most newcomers to design have yet to 
be able to explicitly deal with volumetric space as 
readily as they do the objects defining and giving 
character to the spatial volumes. The question 
being, “Is character, for those who participate in 
our designs, associated with what is seen in plan 
view or seen at eyelevel?” You already know how 
I lean – “eyelevel.” A fun thought at this point is 
that maybe we should take lessons from someone 
like Shawn Sheehy and instead of doing drawings 
we should create pop-up site plans or at least ask 
how the work of Sheehy and the late Professor 
Masahiro Chatani can be brought into landscape, 
architecture, and interior design processes.
In that so much of what landscape architects 
do is in plan view, volume with regard to design 
is a misnomer. Students, and many designers, 
maintain the erroneous idea of landscape volumes 
while so often seeing and describing designs in 
plan view. Doing so carries with it three assumptions. First is that designers and their clients are 
able to imagine the plan view objects’ heights 
above the ground level, proximity to things above 
and below, and sense of enclosure and openness. 
A second assumption is that design instructors and their students, and designers and their 
clients’ imagined images are at least similar if not 
identical. The third assumption is that everyone involved in reviewing a plan has a mutually 
agreed upon understanding of the character and 
content in and across the plan’s spaces. Part of the 
problem, as identified by Arnold (1980), resides 
in the medium by which we develop, explore, and 
convey designs. Although stated earlier, this bears 
repeating:
It seems curious that the 
essential tools used by the 
landscape architect and urban 
designer…nearly always give 
the impression that trees are 
visual barriers at eye level 
because of the way the tree 
crowns are shown superimposed 
solidly on the ground plane. 
The established drawing 
technique does not conform to 
the architectural convention of 
Figure 6.3 Trees as solid and see-through features in plan view (Arnold, 1991, 75).  
Courtesy John Wiley & Sons.
142
showing overhead forms with a 
dotted line.
(Arnold, 1980, 74)
Even with the various graphic techniques employed 
to convey the plan view character and content of 
landscapes they remain laden with assumptions as 
to participants’ developing experiences across a site. 
Eye-level perspectives are a step toward conveying site participants’ experiences but still lack the 
clarity that can be expressed through an accompanying first- or second-person narrative.
Arnold is not alone. Camillo Sitte (1945), 
writing in the late 1800s, notes in a complaining manner throughout his work that a T-square 
and triangle mentality robs urban spaces of their 
vitality. In his analysis of Italian and Swiss public 
spaces as people used them, and historically 
felt comfortable in them, he argued against the 
homogenizing of places by setting their object 
boundaries at 90-degree angles. Also, while the 
third dimension (height) and the fourth dimension (time/movement) remain in the background 
of many of Ashihara’s (1970) statements about 
space, he frequently relates his thoughts to people’s activities. In doing so a sense of volume is 
again unavoidably present. But it remains a sensed 
volume; a more explicit treatment is needed for 
beginning designers.
The arrival of video cameras and now the video 
capability of smartphones have brought a tremendous sense of depth and progression to the 
design process. Even so, both Arnold’s and Jane 
Jacobs’ maxims (1961) to get out and observe 
remain the best supplement to thinking of plan 
views and construction drawings as conveying 
four dimensions. This distinction between actual 
and abstract experiences of space, particularly 
designed space, is revisited in Chapter 10 when 
I discuss the ethical responsibilities of landscape 
architects’ role in designing the living, work, and 
play environments for others.
…two contrasting ways of 
handling time…monochronic 
is characteristic of lowinvolvement peoples, who 
compartmentalize time; they 
schedule one thing at a time 
and become disoriented if they 
have to deal with too many 
things at once. Polychronic 
people, possibly because they 
are so much involved with 
each other, tend to keep several 
operations going at once, like 
jugglers…the monochronic 
person often finds it easier to 
function if he can separate 
activities in space, whereas the 
polychronic person tends to 
collect activities. If, however, 
these two types are interacting 
with each other, much of the 
difficulty they experience can 
be overcome by the proper 
structuring of space.
(Hall, 1969, 173)
Even with the advent of wire-frame models, then 
the likes of the computer program SketchUp, 
and now the ability to generate fly-throughs, the 
ability to study people’s movement toward, into, 
around, and through spaces, designers still tend 
to consider pedestrian and vehicular movement in 
relation to the objects that define spaces in plan 
view. Our preoccupation with objects rather than 
volumetric spaces continues to fix our attention on 
what “looks good” (so often in plan view) and not 
on what the unfolding narration of a landscape 
design communicates at eye level. Now, with the 
ability to test or sample movement through spaces 
(fly-through) as they interrelate various parts of a 
design we do have the ability to assess volumetric 
spaces’ defining features, evaluate the sequencing of experiences relative to those volumes, and 
143
more easily review and edit a design’s landscape or 
spatial narrative. To do this calls for a new starting point in the development of a design. That 
starting point, once you become familiar with 
the potential users of your design, is your writing 
of a first- or second-person experiential narrative 
from the landscape participant’s viewpoint before 
objects are sketched out and flown through.
At every instance, there is more 
than the eye can see, more than 
the ear can hear, a setting or 
a view waiting to be explored. 
Nothing is experienced by itself, 
but always in relation to its 
surroundings, the sequences 
of events leading up to it, the 
memory of past experiences.
(Lynch, 1960, 1)
In his realization that people 
learn, or become socialized to 
the environmental cues they 
read in their surroundings, 
Lynch notes, “This image is 
the product both of immediate 
sensation and of the memory of 
past experiences, and it is used 
to interpret information and to 
guide action”.
(Lynch, 1960, 4)
In much the same way as when a two-­dimensional 
plane moves through space to inscribe a volume 
(Wong, 1972, 7) written paragraphs build 
page upon page, eventually providing a three-­
dimensional volume as a complete narrative or 
story. The metaphor of a defined volume as the 
physical feature that contains, and presents, a 
written narrative opens a number of avenues in 
our understanding of design. Simply, the physical structure of a book is made up of chapters or 
three-dimensional sub-volumes in the same way 
a site is made of subordinate spaces transitioning 
from one to another. We also see that as dimensioned units the linear aspect of sentences, like 
paths, hallways, and roadways, carry us through 
the two-­dimensional area of each paragraph: from 
topical sentence to transitioning sentence to next 
paragraph. With our movement, paragraph after 
paragraph, through the landscape user’s mind, eyes, 
hands, and feet the volume, the three-­dimensional 
space, comes into being. Any collection of subordinate units, chapters, is in turn set within a larger 
context of a bound volume. Remember Alexander’s 
dictum, which he actually says in a variety of ways 
throughout A Pattern Language, 
no pattern is an isolated entity. 
Each pattern can exist in the 
world, only to the extent that 
is supported by other patterns: 
the larger patterns in which it 
is embedded, the patterns of the 
same size that surround it, and 
the smaller patterns which are 
embedded in it.
(1977, xiii)
In a narrative text, the reader 
is forced to make choices all the 
time. Indeed, this obligation 
to choose is found even at 
the level of the individual 
sentence – at least, every 
time a transitive verb occurs. 
Whenever the speaker is about 
to end a sentence, we as readers 
or listeners make a bet (albeit 
unconsciously): we predict his 
144
or her choice, or anxiously 
wonder what choice will be 
made…
(Eco, 1994, 6)
Our culture has come to expect paragraphs to 
lead to chapters and chapters to culminate in a 
book, a volume, or a series of volumes each with 
a sense of closure. However, our expectations go 
beyond the physical characteristics that allow us 
to identify a book, or for that matter any of a 
number of electronic narrative forms. In a narrative, we expect a complete story. We expect 
closure: introduction, body, climax, anticlimax, 
and conclusion. Relative to the various narrative 
genre (e.g., mystery, humor, romance, technical), 
we expect to find what is in a book to present us 
with particular vocabularies through anticipated 
presentation strategies; on the book’s outside we 
expect covers with particular visual representations, lines, colors, and fonts. The developmental 
structure of a narrative is intertwined with and to 
an extent controlled by the character of the physical structure of the book itself. We have expectations and good authors know how to play with 
our expectations.
For a moment, imagine yourself headed to a 
local bookstore. You’re looking for a book that 
would be located in Humor. What are your 
expectations? Picture yourself standing just inside 
the doorway of the bookstore, with the ability 
to see all the shelves of books at once. There 
are no signs identifying the various sections as 
“Humor,” “Fiction,” or “Political Science.” What 
clues would you look for to locate Humor? If 
you could see the shelves of Gothic Romances 
set next to shelves of books of silliness how 
would the book covers appear different from 
each other: color, images on the covers, types 
of lines, visual forms, and lettering making 
up the covers? In the same way culture contributes to your preconceptions about book 
covers, their range of colors, characteristic 
lines, forms, and fonts, you carry about –  
and rely upon – you also carry about preconceived ideas of particular landscapes. Even for 
many hard-core urbanites, the typical imagery 
associated with a university campus is that of 
large expanses of grass, stately brick buildings 
with ivy covered walls, and wide walkways. 
Sites, therefore, are not discrete entities disconnected from their greater geographical or 
historical contexts or without some expected 
organization structuring the smaller spaces 
within them and their connective transitions 
with their surroundings.
An anticipated organization of superordinate 
and subordinate spatial units applies to many 
sites’ narratives. Like our approach to stories or 
technical reports, the readers of a landscape have 
certain expectations regarding a site’s message 
format and syntax. The most elementary organization includes an easily read approach, arrival, 
entry, route(s) to a destination or destinations, 
way back or way out, and exit. Keep in mind that 
the users’ expectations and the vocabularies read 
by bicyclists, motorists, and truck drivers vary. 
Imagine yourself traversing the same roadway 
on a bicycle, in a compact car, and in the cab 
of a tractor-trailer truck. Your expectations of 
what constitutes approaches and entryways vary 
in scale; and those expectations are what authors 
rely on. In much the same way authors know 
their audiences, landscape architects have a good 
idea of those people who will likely use their 
designs. Authoring a landscape narrative calls 
for designers to anticipate and rely on people’s 
Figure 6.4 Washington State University, Spokane Campus. Photo by Campus Photographer Cori Kogan.
145
expectations. What says “Welcome,” “Come this 
way,” and what says “Stay away”? What communicates happiness, better yet gaiety, and what says 
“You are approaching a solemn place, behave 
­accordingly.”
An excellent self-reflective exercise is to take 
a few moments and consider the messages that 
make up three or four sites with which you are 
familiar. You can even think back over your 
first-time visit to a place such as a new campus 
or employer’s office, a spa, or event center. 
Consider the template of images you anticipated 
fulfilling. Lay out the route you traveled and the 
story’s parts along the way. Remember how your 
expectations were modified, refined, drastically 
changed, or ignored. Now consider a time and 
place where you got lost. What messages violated your anticipated actions? From your point 
of view, what wasn’t in place? What didn’t you 
find that you were consciously or unconsciously 
looking for? What signs or signals weren’t you 
able to identify and understand? Designers need 
to anticipate why people come to a particular 
place and work with what people expect (either 
in support of or contrast to), what they anticipate finding as they move through a landscape 
or an interior space.
SPACES WITHIN SPACES
Cullens’ serial vision (1961, 17–20) can be a fairly 
strict, linear, additive, sequential narrative experience or it can be more like Jorge Luis Borges’s 
The Garden of the Forking Paths (Borges, 1962). 
Borges’s Garden plays with the multiple paths a 
person can take between two points and end up at 
the same conclusion (destination). Space and time 
provide alternative opportunities from which to 
choose one path at the expense of another, one 
narrative construct as opposed to another and yet 
arrive at the same end point. It is a lot like sailing. 
You are always plotting a course to the same destination while responding to changing tides, currents, and winds.
Conceived in this way, designs can be prepared 
to allow their readers to have a hand in selecting 
from a variety of narratives on a variety of occasions. Consider the variety of experiential narratives one can have in a Japanese garden, a national 
park, Costco, or a friend’s backyard. Our movement away from believing a design capable of providing a single, sequential chronology of events, 
to one that provides multiple, potentially overlapping, narratives opens the door for us to review 
and apply other genres’ formats such as mystery, 
romance, anxiety, and more that, in turn, employ 
flashbacks, foreshadowing, frame stories, jump 
cuts, and fade ins and fade outs. Whichever path 
is taken by the reader, there remains the design’s 
need for that route to be readable and safe, to 
work with the appropriate sensory vocabulary. 
To move safely through landscape spaces requires 
a straightforward functional narrative. But they 
needn’t be as simplistic as “place Tab A into slot 
B” but that’s a good analogy to keep in mind. 
The overarching need to address public safety and 
welfare is what most distinguishes landscape narratives from that of the narratives found in the 
arts: paintings, music, storytelling.
DIALECTIC STRUCTURE
A dialectic is a form of two-way or back-andforth communication, a dialog, or discourse that, 
to a great extent, shapes itself as it moves along. 
Throughout any conversation you are constantly 
adjusting your stance, word choice, tone of voice 
in response to who you are talking with as they do 
the same with you.
Understanding what a designer needs to consider as the interaction between her landscape (or 
architecture, or interior) design is made clearer 
when we consider Jurgen Habermas’s rules for 
“ideal speech acts” (Scarfo, 1989). In that as 
designer-authors we produce landscapes that 
express narratives, the goal of communicating 
those narratives has the expectation of a mutual 
level of understanding between designer and user. 
If in fact there are signs and symbols in landscape 
and built forms that communicate information, 
directions, emotionally and culturally laden messages, then for them to be understood and appreciated, an unspoken contract exists between the 
designer-author, the client, and the user-reader. 
146
stones telling you to “Come this way, and oh 
look, steps up on to the side deck.”
The other possible approach, maybe for firsttime visitors versus long-time friends, is to follow 
the opening in the planting beds and turn to the 
right, then follow the lawn which turns to the left 
and the front door.
What is interesting here, like Jorge Luis 
Borges’s The Garden of the Forking Paths 
(Borges, 1962), there are (not shown here) multiple ways to arrive up at the front door or side 
deck. Some more enclosed with plantings and 
others more open.
Figure 6.5 Part 1 (6.5.1–6.5.5): serial vision as 
narrative sequence. Photos by author. 
Part 2 (6.5.6–6.5.8): serial vision as narrative sequence. Photos by author.
The break in the vegetation and low stone wall 
along the edge of the sidewalk says “Come on in.”
Then there are actually three possible routes to 
join the party: one through the arbor to the side 
yard, and two that call you off to the right to the 
front door.
Walking toward the arbor then opens a framed 
view of the side yard and deck with the stepping147
That designer-user contract says that what is 
expressed by a landscape calls for it to be:
1.	Comprehensible – designed features introduced into an environment are perceived, 
identified, understood, and interpreted correctly; otherwise, we’d be walking into walls, 
off cliffs, or into traffic.
2.	Sincere – expressed directions, invitations, 
warnings, and emotions are honestly stated/
displayed. If landscape narrative statements 
were not true then we’d never believe what we 
were being asked to act out. Imagine this situation on an expressway, an urban walkway, a 
marina or urban park.
3.	Appropriate – landscape features “are appropriate within their social [cultural] rules structuring the situation” (Scarfo, 1989, 19–20). 
Imagine the cultural rules employed in the 
design of an English landscape garden used to 
develop the layout of a military base.
4.	True, factually correct – here I can’t help 
but imagine landscapes designed by M. C. 
Escher, or those that employ trompe-l’oeil, 
or those prepared by the best of the sidewalk 
chalk artists.
If you’ve read this far, then you’ve likely bought 
into the idea of landscape narratives. As such, 
people approaching, entering, and enjoying the 
landscapes between their front doors and wherever 
they end up involve a dialectic, a dialog between 
that person and the environment. In much the 
same way two people meet and greet each other 
or have an extended conversation, there is a back 
and forth with what is perceived, identified, interpreted, and in a sense tested, in an effort to safely 
and enjoyably traverse a place.
From the recipient/user’s viewpoint, the 
merger of a design’s functional and artistic features is an achieved balance of identification, 
recognition, and interpretation. Our ability to 
identify the measurable characteristics of landscape spaces, to know that we can pass through, 
drive into, or walk over them, does little to 
foster the kinds of appreciation associated with 
the emotional pleasure we get from strictly functional messages gussied up with aesthetically 
pleasing modifications.
As the users of landscapes, we typically 
move about with little conscious thought to the 
explicit identification of this object, then those 
textures, then that pattern, and that sequence. 
Figure 6.6 Visual illusion. Iceland uses optical illusion to slow traffic. Courtesy of Gautur  
Ivar Halldorsson, photographer and owner Vegamálun GIH.
148
Like grammar and syntax, we rarely think of 
how this and that rule is to be employed in composing a sentence. We just, in a sense, say what 
comes to mind. We hear, we listen, we interpret 
at multiple levels, and, as a result, we communicate. In this process, we also modify our ability 
to read and respond to the other as we go along. 
What we hear, and how it is expressed, causes 
us to modify what we say and how we express 
ourselves. That is the dialectic, the simultaneous 
forming and informing of the reader, the participant in the narrative, and the narrative itself. At 
any given place and time, what is significant to 
us as readers gives form to our decoding process, 
our experiences of moving through a space, which 
in turn reinforces or modifies what is significant 
to us as the reader. As a fundamental building 
block in our coming to understand a design, the 
interaction between what is expressed and what 
is interpreted resides in the realm of the social 
dimensions of communication (Hall, 1969; 
1981; Sommer, 1969; Newman, 1972). If you 
would like to really get into the nuances of the 
expressive qualities of landscape, architecture, 
and interior design take some time to associate 
various forms of nonverbal communication –  
body movement, posture, facial expressions, gestures, eye contact, comfortable social spaces and 
social distances – in environments you experience every day.
TEXTURAL ORGANIZATION 
IN SPACE AND TIME
Space and time are the fundamental qualities 
with which we work. Geography is one discipline spatial designers should reference for 
data in support of many of their arguments. 
Geographical studies run the spectrum from the 
social and spatial analysis of rooms in a house 
(Wood and Beck, 1994) and residential streets 
(Schmidt, 1975), to towns, villages, and cities 
(Ley, 1983; Smith, 1984; Relph, 1987; Yamin 
and Metheny, 1996) and regions and nation 
states (Hartshorne, 1939; Hagerstrand, 1970). In 
a similar fashion, these geographical realms of life 
are reflected in the temporal works of historians 
(Harington, 1986; Cronon, 1991; 1983). For 
designers working in particular countries, a wonderful blend of geographical and historical contextual analysis is found in what is often referred 
to as American Studies, Canadian Studies, Latin 
American Studies, and the study of specific nation 
states, or cultural regions. Their works describe 
and explain the manifestation of cultural values 
in such things as literature, poetry, painting, 
household items, neighborhoods, landscapes, 
and more. Their works identify various sensual 
languages (visual, audio, taste) and their interpretation, or the ways in which they can be read. 
One wonderful example that covers much of what 
was mentioned above is John Conron’s American 
Picturesque (2000).
Space and time, or as geographers say “timespace geography,” exist in each of The Analogy’s 
three realms of narrative expression: functional, 
social cultural, and collective unconscious. How 
space and time contribute to the organization of 
written, basic design, or landscape texts resides 
in both the physical and social realms in which 
they are set. Space and its construct provide the 
designer with features that are both constraints 
and opportunities. You can’t imprint a 12ʺ square 
object on an 8.5ʺ ×11ʺ piece of paper, but you 
can draw people’s attention with only one word 
on an otherwise blank sheet of paper. There are 
only a finite number of ways you can employ an 
ascending slope, descending slope, and horizon in 
a landscape design. The organization of the physical aspects of a design – location, orientation, and 
sequencing – is socially and culturally structured 
and each brings with it its own set of opportunities and constraints. Design, as a process, does 
have structure. It occurs not in a vacuum but 
within the larger physical, social, and expressive 
contexts in which it is being designed and eventually built.
In their visual form as recorded text, letters 
and words are placed, or located on a page or 
149
within a framal reference. That location immediately sets up or denies the addition of certain 
other words. Excluding, for now, Avant-garde 
forms of communication, if the location of the 
first word of a text is in the middle of a page, then 
additional text typically moves across and down 
the page from that point. Written words in other 
languages, Chinese and Hebrew, move across 
and up and down pages according to their cultural parameters. Nevertheless, the starting point 
of the text, within the greater social and cultural 
contexts, greatly determines the direction and 
quantity of what follows on that page, and what 
the reader expects to find on subsequent pages. 
Given various written texts, all have a starting 
point, middle, and end as should a design and its 
narrative.
Art is a social product (1)…
artistic practice is situated 
practice, the mediation 
of aesthetic codes…and 
ideological, social, and material 
processes and institutions. At 
the same time [the sociology 
of art] insists that we do not 
lose sight of the artist as the 
locus of this mediation and the 
facilitator of its expression …
the artist as producer…[and] 
the nature of artistic work as 
located production.
(Wolff, 1981, 136)
Even the process of editing a written text responds 
to both physical and social parameters. The placement of an editor’s notes, even an author’s or reader’s editorial remarks, is typically added outside 
the bounds of a text. Such notes are not only 
physically located outside the text, in the margins, 
but suggested improvements are also located 
outside the context of what was originally written, 
the narrative. An editor’s remarks and reader’s 
thoughts are added within the page’s borders as 
critique or reaction to the text’s contents and 
outside the text’s boundaries. Examples of this are 
often found whenever a designer thinks graphically. The heart of a design, whether a concept 
diagram or isometric or perspective sketch, is typically surrounded by critical thoughts, variations 
on a theme, or whole new views.
The placement of words on pages is also 
directed by the physical context within which 
the message is being produced: page layout in 
portrait or landscape format “the part of graphic 
design that deals in the arrangement of visual 
elements on a page. It generally involves organizational principles of composition to achieve 
specific communication objectives” (Wikipedia, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Page_layout). 
The use of the physical space, the area of a 
page, is sectioned or formatted differently for 
advertisements, technical reports, grant applications, cartoons, essays, and the like. Even 
photographs are generally composed using 
the “rule of thirds.” Imagine a sheet of paper 
used to communicate a National Endowment 
of the Arts or National Science Foundation 
grant proposal formatted in a manner similar 
to the pages of Mad Magazine or Dell Comics. 
If you still doubt there are rules surrounding 
the location and placement of marks on a text, 
watch the reaction of design students when an 
instructor pulls out a felt-tipped pen and marks 
up their drawings. The normative behavior, the 
typical behavior in that situation, is what James 
Adams, in Conceptual Blockbusting (1976), 
refers to as “conceptual blocks.” Our normative 
thinking is to recognize a problem and “pick 
the first solution that comes to mind and run 
with it” (xi). Adams helps us shift from that 
normative approach of convergent thinking to 
a more divergent approach to problem solving 
150
that provides for a number of appropriate and 
complete solutions from which to work.
We often think of a bounded area, or framal 
reference, or the boundaries of a perspective 
sketch, as the physical context within which 
things may be placed or activities carried out 
within varying degrees of social approval (social/
cultural context). As we move from one location 
to another, one country to another country, how 
similar types of spaces are defined change along 
with the social mores that guide the activities 
that occur within and around those spaces.
Time, the period during which an activity 
occurs, or doesn’t occur, is another bounded 
context across which the values associated with 
places and things change. Holiday meals at the 
grandparents: how many of us remember eating 
at the “children’s” table during family holiday 
gatherings? How many of us now, as adults, 
often wish at holiday gatherings that we were 
again off in the kitchen with the kids? Toys 
and play places fade from places of importance 
to nostalgic remembrances. What was once 
nouveau is now retro. What was once “a happening” is now a “New York Minute.” As with 
oral history, the words, characters, and places 
may change over the years, but the messages 
may remain the same (Rubin, 1995). While 
composing a landscape narrative may find you 
unconsciously considering time, it may be worth 
the effort to consciously consider your designs’ 
planned-for activities in terms of their temporal characteristics: fast, slow, rhythmic, sporadic: 
paving patterns; tree canopy shadows; spacing 
of plants, planters, benches. How does the landscape narrative transition into and then come 
out and away from an activity? Are the landscape 
features positioned? You can see how they associate with adjacent activities within the site and 
to the adjacent sites. And what landscape features communicate the changes, the transitions 
linking the activity spaces?
Good design is contextual on so many levels. 
By now you are probably thinking that good 
design works with local social and larger cultural 
contexts. It is guided by the potential interpretations of those who will be left to experience the 
design within the social, cultural, and ecological 
contexts of its location. Good design fits into 
the social and natural dynamic equilibrium of a 
place. The better a designer knows the eventual 
users of a design, the kinds of spatial volumes and 
Figures 6.7.1–6.7.3 Three social spaces, similar directional messages. Photos by author.
151
sequences of spatial volumes with which they are 
most comfortable, the more the likely the users 
will, as Norberg-Schulz notes, identify with, find 
personal and collective meaning in, and feel comfortable with where they are, their sense of orientation within their own life and their social and 
cultural contexts.
DESIGN PRINCIPLES AS 
APPLIED TO VOLUMETRIC 
SPACE AND NARRATIVE
A study of Christopher Alexander’s Pattern 
Language (1977) provides us with two interesting 
points. First, it would be easy to argue that almost 
all 253 patterns are nouns, things. A few can be 
considered verbs, actions or behaviors, like #63 
Dancing in the Street, #138 Sleeping to the East, # 
165 Opening to the Street, and #168 Connection 
to the Earth. Still, their descriptions are all about 
objects, their placement, and their relative positions. The unspoken thought is that the objects 
represent, call for, and support particular behaviors in particular spaces. The assumption being 
the delineated space accommodates the activities. 
In other words, the verbs of people’s actions are 
somehow set in among the nouns making up the 
physical spaces. The second point of interest, and 
more startling, even though it does make sense, 
is that the word “space” is almost nonexistent in 
A Pattern Language. I said it makes sense because 
all the noun patterns, and their associated subordinate and superordinate noun patterns, take up 
space and in doing so give shape, content, and 
character to spaces and sequences of spaces all 
calling for the given activities. One strong exception is Pattern #106, Positive Outdoor Space. 
Here Alexander delves into positive and negative 
space, how to identify it, figure/ground, degree of 
enclosure, and people’s feelings of comfort and 
discomfort. A second exception is found in #121 
Path Shape. Space is mentioned but not to the 
extent it is explored in #106. A few others include 
#132 Short Passages, #146 Flexible Office Space, 
# 152 Workspace Enclosure, and #191 Shape of 
Outdoor Space. Even with these, the spaces are 
typically referred to as what they are, passages, 
rooms, halls, corridors, and the architectural 
features that define them. Still, “space” is not as 
explicitly prevalent as we would expect.
In stating that a pattern can only exist within 
larger patterns and simultaneously be composed 
of smaller patterns Alexander speaks to the serial 
vision of volumetric spaces. He 
…says that when you build 
a thing you cannot merely 
build that thing in isolation, 
but must also repair the world 
around it, and within it, 
so that the larger world at 
that one place becomes more 
coherent, and more whole; and 
the thing which you make takes 
its place in the web of nature, 
as you made it.
(1977, xiii)
In how he speaks to A Pattern Language, especially in its counterpart, The Timeless Way of 
Building (1979), I can’t help but feel Alexander is 
a product of his generation, both chronologically 
and professionally. His “quality without a name” 
is so Taoist. “There is a central quality which is 
the root criterion of life and spirit in a man, a 
town, a building, or in a wilderness. This quality 
is objective and precise, but it cannot be named” 
(Alexander, 1977, 19). In an effort to express 
“this quality when it is one with itself…true to 
its own inner forces…[and] at peace with itself” 
(Alexander, 1979, 26), Alexander shares words 
which he feels are commonly used in an effort to 
identify the unidentifiable quality: alive, whole, 
comfortable, free, exact, egoless, and eternal. He 
concludes, “…in spite of every effort to give this 
quality a name, there is no single name which 
captures it” (Alexander, 1977, 39). Yet, there is a 
seamless coming together of parts, a flow between 
152
nouns to provide an ongoing comfortable appreciation. Done well, we could consider this blend 
of patterns and paths as the building blocks of an 
esthetic experience.
Much like the Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching, once The 
Way is named, is given a single label to identify it, 
it is lost.
The Way that can be spoken of 
Is not the constant way;  
The name than can be named 
Is not the constant name.  
The nameless was the beginning 
of heaven and earth;  
The named was the mother of 
the myriad creatures.
(Lao Tse, 1963, 57)
Or, more simply stated,
The name that can be named is 
not the real Name.
(Lao Tse, 1955, 37)
Alexander (1977) reveals two criteria regarding 
the patterns, or “elements of this language” (x). 
The first is connectivity or “connections between 
patterns” (xii). He notes that as the means by 
which larger and smaller patterns are brought 
together each is tied “to all those smaller patterns 
in a language, which are needed to complete [the 
larger] pattern, to embellish it, to fill it out” (xi). 
Without using the word, Alexander’s realization 
speaks to syntax as applied to activities and the 
volumetric spaces and sequential spaces of which 
they are comprised. What narrative brings to A 
Pattern Language is the aspect of motion, time, 
change, growth, and becoming. With this realization a wonderful interplay can be explored by 
bringing the nouns making up Alexander’s A 
Pattern Language together with the verbs making 
up the basis of Bacon’s Design of Cities (1974) and 
Aminzadeh et al.’s scenario writing (2016). Bacon 
brings “movement” to Alexander’s patterns. 
Blended, they bring setting and surroundings 
to the actions and activities expressed in a narrative. Combined, they enhance the expression 
of Alexander’s settings and Bacon’s syntax and 
Aminzadeh et al.’s scenario writing as used in the 
production of films. 
Up to this point architecture 
has been discussed as a 
series of linked spaces, each 
possessing a particular 
quality and each related to 
the other…a continuous, 
unbroken, flow of impressions 
that assault their senses as 
they move through it. For a 
design to be a work of art, the 
impressions it produces in the 
participator must be not only 
continuous, but harmonious 
at every instant and from 
every viewpoint.
(Bacon, 1974, 20)
If there is a spectrum connecting nouns and verbs 
to be drawn from Simonds’ realization that by 
designing experiences, we come to identify the 
spaces, places, and things making up our designs, 
then Alexander is at the spaces, places, and things 
end while Bacon is at the experiences end.
I agree with Alexander, there is a quality to the 
spaces in which we live that can never quite be 
captured in a word, in a name. I am sure most 
people have a place that lives in their heart. It 
is a feeling that pervades their soul but can’t be 
simply expressed to another person. At the same 
time there is a quality that when recognized and 
brought into A Pattern Language brings life with 
it. That quality is motion, movement. Life as 
motion and movement is what brings the things 
and the experiences of growth, learning, and 
153
­fulfillment to a landscape participant. “Cinematic 
technique, with its sequencing of spaces and 
events makes users aware of the importance of 
time and motion” (Aminzadeh et al., 2016, 176). 
In a well-written narrative, moving from word 
to word is how the narrative takes on shape and 
substance. While Alexander doesn’t speak directly 
to it, realizing the interplay of movement in A 
Pattern Language does make it more complete.
Bacon’s recognition of movement calls for the 
“involvement of the whole self” (Bacon, 1974, 
15). In fact, when you read Design of Cities 
(Bacon, 1974) with an eye to motion you quickly 
realize that space as experience is fundamental to 
Bacon’s whole thesis. And with this realization it 
is impossible not to again announce the critical 
importance of Simonds’ call for us to recognize 
our contribution to the design of people’s experiences. Given all The Analogy has provided you 
thus far, you have a strong foundation for the 
four-dimensional, sensual language of landscape, 
architecture, and interior design as it guides and is 
guided by the authoring of narratives.
LEADING TO NARRATIVE
The communication of messages within each 
domain of people’s lives responds to the rules of 
grammar and syntax and their various interpretations (Alexander, 1977; Bacon, 1974; Benzel, 
1998; Forman and Godron, 1986; Smith, 1977; 
Watts, 1975). When a composition of physical 
objects and identifiable spaces comes together 
as an orchestration of sensations, the principles 
of design are brought into play in conjunction 
with the structural aspects of story and discourse: 
the welcoming greetings (front stoops, gateways, 
entries) expressed before a formal entry and subsequent area for the removal of jackets, hats and 
shoes, and so on (Alexander, 1977; Wood and 
Beck, 1994). These sequential volumetric arrival 
areas are what Alexander (1977) refers to as the 
“elements” of his pattern language.
The structural flow of Alexander’s pattern elements is further substantiated by what we can refer 
to as a dynamic conformity. This structuring of conformity (not sameness) across an area, a site, is found 
in Cullen’s serial vision and Sitte’s concern that 
the ideal street must form a 
completely enclosed unit…
where the gaze cannot be 
lost in infinity…the winding 
character of the ancient streets 
kept sealing off perspective 
views in them while offering 
the eye a new aspect at each 
succeeding turn.
(Collins and Collins, 
1986, 199)
For other examples of this less-is-more approach 
to experiential places made up of enclosed units 
see Bacon (1974) and Ardalan and Bakhtiar 
(1973) and as you do, remember Alexander’s 
tenet that 
no pattern is an isolated  
entity. Each pattern can exist 
in the world, only to the  
extent that is supported by 
other patterns: the larger 
patterns in which it is 
embedded, the patterns of the 
same size that surround it, and 
the smaller patterns which are 
embedded in it.
(1977, xiii)
Stated differently, in regard to movement into and 
through an area, what was the larger pattern of an 
area’s context becomes the pattern being experienced. As such, as you continue to move forward, 
the experienced pattern becomes one of the 
smaller patterns now in support of the next larger 
one. All together they contribute to sequences of 
called for behaviors and experiences.
I hope you’ve begun to realize we are characters 
in our own stories. As both designer-as-author and 
154
user-as-reader we experience landscape narratives 
and with a little self-reflection we learn from those 
experiences whether walking or riding, bicycling, 
or using public transit, enjoying a public garden, 
or a private space on an urban roof top. Life is 
serial vision, sequences of interconnected or at 
times juxtaposed spaces and emerging experiences. They are our daily stories, our daily dance. 
They are the narratives that connect us with our 
environments, regions, social groups, and nation 
states. Paraphrasing the close of each episode of 
the TV series “The Naked City,” “There are a 
million stories in the naked city.” Each day yours 
is just one of them. No, they weren’t referring to 
landscape, architecture, or interior spaces but like 
today’s detective and adventure stories you do so 
often see the action sequences unfolding in settings you’ve come to expect.
As used in this book, ‘spatial 
form’ in its simplest sense 
designates the techniques 
by which novelists subvert 
the chronological sequence 
inherent in narrative. We 
read narratives one word after 
another, and in this sense all 
narratives are chronological 
sequences. But the novelist’s 
arrangement of events within 
this linear flow of words often 
departs in varying degrees from 
strict chronological order.
(Smitten and Daghistany, 
1981, 13)
An odd thought comes to mind. Is it possible 
to arrive at a space where there is an absence of 
activity: an activity-less space? What kinds of feelings would you have? What expectations would 
not be being met? In answering those questions 
it begins to become clear, to me at least, there 
is no place where there is no narrative. Like the 
pauses between notes help produce music, so to 
an absence of information, of incomplete messages, is part of a larger narrative. Accepting that, 
we must concern ourselves with context, theme, 
connectivity, and interconnectivity of narrative, 
and place, and users’ purposes. In doing so we 
accept the sequencing of selected nouns and verbs 
moving across and down a piece of paper with the 
expectation of character development, connectivity from word to word, action to action, and 
a coherency between, we could say, Alexander’s 
noun/things and Bacon’s verb/actions.
To read a novel expecting the 
satisfaction of closure and the 
receipt of a complete message is 
what most people find enough 
to do [when reading]; they 
are easier with this message 
because it resembles the one 
that works for ordinary acts of 
communication. In this way 
the gap is closed between what 
is sent and what is received…
[as a result] it is not uncommon 
for large parts of a novel to go 
virtually unread.
(Mitchell, 1981, 84)
While Mitchell refers to narrative, specifically in 
a poem, I can’t help but apply what he says to 
landscape narrative. “Of course the poem encourages us to do these things [make connections and 
draw conclusions] by ending [the poem] with the 
sort of message that seems possible and proper” 
(81). Among the “things” Mitchell says we seek 
is closure even when it isn’t what the author 
155
intended, but “in the end, [we have] made it say 
something that suits us” (81), that speaks to a 
landscape participant’s expectations. We expect 
completed actions. We expect closure, anticipate 
life trajectories, character development. Given the 
sequential nature of a developing landscape narrative, we anticipate between departure from one 
place and arrival at another place a sequence of 
serial completions: I crossed the street; I arrived at 
the small park; I found a coffee stand; and so on.
In his analysis of narrative, Mitchell presents 
us with an interesting quality. Narratives have an 
immediate dimension and a deeper, less obvious, 
“secret” dimension. For us, as landscape designer-­
authors, our “secret” dimension beyond the immediate functional messages include the socio-cultural 
aspects of period and place and the deeper associations touched in our collective unconscious.
…Eliot and Pound, for 
example – undermine the 
inherent consecutiveness of 
language, forcing the reader to 
perceive elements of the poem 
not as unrolling in time but as 
juxtaposed in space [across the 
page]…The suppression of these 
connectives alters the whole 
character of the literary work 
and forces the reader to  
perceive it in a new, 
unconventional way.
(Smitten and Daghistany, 
1981, 17)
New York’s High Line is a good example of immediate and deeper more secret messages. Most 
immediately the 1.45 mile elevated linear park, 
is just that a linear environment that connects 
the Meatpacking District to the Javis Center and 
any number of places along the way. Slightly less 
immediate messages revolve around the fact that 
Built on a historic, elevated rail 
line, the High Line was always 
intended to be more than a 
park. You can walk through 
gardens, view art, experience 
a performance, savor delicious 
food, or connect with friends 
and neighbors-all while 
enjoying a unique perspective 
of New York City.
(https://www.thehighline. 
org/about/)
Even deeper, the park symbolically tells people 
“New York cares about you; New York cares about 
its history and its neighborhoods.” “We are building on the inventiveness of our past.” So, with 
landscape architect James Corner’s comment that 
“the High Line’s design ‘is characterized by an 
intimate choreography of movement’” we delve 
a little deeper still into the narrative. Regarding 
the levels of narrative expressed, Mitchell says that 
“by various signs” other matters than the most 
immediate storyline are detectable “for the sake of 
clearness and effect” (85). With that, let’s explore 
narrative in general, and landscape narrative in 
particular, a little more deeply.
The Analogy’s first six chapters laid a foundation on which to build the upcoming 
­narrative-storyboard-design process. A number 
of times to this point I’ve wanted to say I realized how complicated and at times seemingly 
convoluted the three-tiered analogy is. I didn’t. 
In playing with The Analogy I’m still recognizing new lessons that improve my understanding 
of landscape architectural design. There remains 
so much to be discovered. HRH Prince Charles, 
in his effort to “support public participation in 
156
planning,” sums up my thinking. Although he 
is speaking of architecture and urban design, his 
thinking is applicable to landscape architecture 
and interior design.
Buildings should reflect 
these [Classical] harmonies, 
for architecture is like 
a language. You cannot 
construct pleasing sentences 
in English unless you have 
a thorough knowledge of 
the grammatical ground 
rules. If you abandon these 
basic principles of grammar 
the result is discordant and 
inharmonious.
(Moughtin, 2003, 11)
With the beginnings of “grammatical ground 
rules” now in hand, we turn to their application 
of the rules to landscape narratives. 
7
Narrative
L
    andscapes, as with all built environments, 
whether purposefully designed or the 
   outcome of decades or centuries of vernacular development, express narratives. Their stories 
may be experienced as the spiritual redemption of 
a cathedral’s forecourt and entryway or as simple, 
and yet meaningful, as the unavoidable communal sharing at a farmers’ market. Alexander captures this breadth of expression when he says, “A 
pattern language gives each person who uses it 
the power to create an infinite variety of new and 
unique buildings, just as his ordinary language 
gives him the power to create an infinite variety 
of sentences” (Alexander, 1979, xi). In how these 
environments express themselves, I agree with 
Robert Vischer who sensed 
an almost mythic quality 
in empathy and spoke of a 
person forming an emotional 
union with an external object. 
Observing that feelings may be 
aroused by experiencing totally 
abstract objects (as well storms, 
sunsets, trees), he surmises that 
we may empathize with objects 
by projecting our personal 
emotions on them. 
(Bloomer and Moore,  
1977, 29)
Complimentary, personally expanding, or humbling, those projections are recognitions of the 
existential qualities of our environments. Social 
geographer Marwyn Samuels sees such existential 
environments as
always an authored space 
and, in methodological terms, 
Figure 7.1 Horseshoe Lake, Deer Park, WA. 
Photo by author.
Figure 7.2 Grand Teton National Park, WY.  
Photo by author.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-8
159
160
always has a biography as 
well as an intellectual history. 
The method of an existential 
geography is to ‘begin with the 
subjective,’ which is to say with 
some author rooted in some 
situation. 
(Samuels, 1978, 33)
The situation in which I ask the readers of Storytelling 
for Landscape Architecture to be rooted are the expectations of those people most likely to experience 
their designs. Exploring narrative as employed in 
landscapes requires we look beyond design and into 
language, literature, and a bit of philosophy.
There is more written on landscape as narrative and on aspects of landscape narrative outside 
landscape architecture than within. With that 
comes good and bad news. The good news is that 
many non-design professional authors mine the 
landscape-narrative metaphor much more deeply 
than designers do and we benefit from their work. 
Social and cultural geographers and philosophers 
of art, in particular, refine the metaphor and 
provide designers with philosophical rationales 
for practical applications of narrative. If there is 
bad news, it is that many art historians and philosophers can’t seem to see beyond architecture as 
their object of study and admit to the existence 
and role of landscapes.
Light and Smith’s (2005) compilation of 
works in The Aesthetics of Everyday Life has a lot 
to offer designers’ understanding of environmental and everyday aesthetics. At the same time a 
number of the contributing authors’ works exemplify a shortcoming in art and environmental 
philosophers, aestheticians, and art historians’ 
approaches to aesthetics. Simply, they are primarily object oriented. Their thinking grows out of a 
historic, passive appreciation of singular objects 
such as paintings, sculptures, or pieces of music. 
So conditioned are they to viewing “an object” 
that they fail to see, and appreciate the volumetric 
spaces around, preceding and leading up to those 
objects: in other words, landscape. Landscape is 
just something connected to or growing out of 
a building’s influences. Yet, my first project out 
of school had a multimillion dollar complex of 
buildings responding to the landscape, and not 
the other way around.
One can think of landscapes 
as scenes, or carefully designed 
and choreographed spaces 
controlling human actions 
or movements: for example, 
public plazas, park meadows, 
rooftop gardens, or parking 
garages, with various 
thresholds, vistas, and niches 
working cumulatively both to 
encourage and arrest spatial 
experience.
(Berger, 1998, 8)
With that realization, be cautious as you explore 
the aesthetics of architecture. I know from experience, how easy it is to get drawn into and accept 
their incomplete arguments. They are incomplete 
in two senses. First, in that their aesthetics are all 
too often those of passive observers, not active 
participants. Their approaches to environmental 
Figure 7.3 Wave Action, Plymouth Beach, MA. 
Photo by author.
161
aesthetics are hindered by an attitude that architecture is to be appreciated much like you would 
a sculpture or painting and not participated in as 
you would a landscape, or a dance, or a stream 
when fly fishing, or a rock climb. Second, as 
stated above, landscape is all too often not recognized as landscape but as an extension of architecture. Philosophy Professor, Arnold Berleant, gives 
a good example of that thinking. 
When we turn to architecture, 
we find this enlarged space 
extended inward as well as 
outward. Mass opens within to 
enclose space, and this interior 
volume is designed for people…
At the same time, architecture 
reaches far beyond the aura of 
sculpture into the surrounding 
space of its site, incorporating 
that space into an ensemble 
with its physical structure. Such 
an enlarged space may extend 
beyond the site and adjoining 
grounds to contiguous or 
nearby structures.
(Berleant, 2005, 25)
Berleant continues, 
To regard architecture 
merely as the art of building 
distorts the way in which it 
actually organizes an entire 
environment. The design of a 
building determines not just 
its own features, it also affects 
the site on which the building 
rests and our perception of the 
structures that stand nearby. 
Sometimes, in fact, a building 
casts its character over an 
entire neighborhood, for 
buildings are not self-sufficient 
objects but places for human 
activity, determining the 
patterns of movement toward, 
into, and out of them, as well 
as within them. This fact 
transforms our understanding 
of architecture from an art 
of physical structures into 
an art of complex social and 
environmental organization.
(Berleant, 2005, 29–30)
And still no direct mention or attention given 
landscape, or the influence of the landscape in 
which the architecture is set.
I can’t help but wonder how a landscape architect would have written Berleant’s two previous 
quotes. Would the building “actually organize the 
entire environment”? Would the building, alone, 
effect the site on which it rests? And would the 
aesthetic experience be derived from a thing, an 
object, or from the progression through spaces, 
over time, starting somewhere early in the day 
or week with a person’s expectations, then first 
impressions, then actual arrival and entry into the 
building? To what extent was the building’s design 
influenced by the topography, soil mechanics, 
bedrock, neighborhood, and surrounding landscapes? When I conducted study sessions for 
architects preparing for their registration exams I 
learned from them that the most difficult section 
of their exam was the section dealing with topography and site design. It was obvious they had 
learned to think from the building out and not 
the landscape in.
162
Berleant further helps us understand the lack 
of attention given landscape when he says 
The distinctive pleasure we 
associate with the arts involves 
an aesthetic of objects – an 
aesthetic of art objects and 
sometimes of objects in nature. 
These stand at the theoretical 
center, and most discussion 
concerns the distinctiveness of 
such objects, their properties, 
qualities, and other features, 
their forms and order, and 
how they transfigure the world 
beyond in ways that render 
it aesthetically enjoyable. 
Contemplating this aesthetic of 
objects is a distinctive way of 
appreciating them.
(25)
He reinforces the singular view of architecture as 
an art object comparable to a painting, sculpture, 
piece of music, or theatrical or dance production. 
I find it inconceivable that anyone could look at, 
could passively contemplate Sedona’s Chapel of 
the Holy Cross only as an aesthetic object without 
they’re thoughts being influenced by and growing 
out of the landscape in which it is situated. Unlike 
Berleant I see “how the world beyond” transfigured the chapel “in ways that render it aesthetically enjoyable.”
Unlike the “passive and contemplative” appreciations associated with art objects, most architecture, landscape, and interior aesthetic experiences 
are whole-body experiences that extend from the 
awe inspiring to the mundane. It was an “aha” 
moment the day I realized my butt had immediate, mundane aesthetic experiences with a comfortable chair, a well-engineered car or motorcycle 
seat, or an ergonomically designed park bench. 
Aesthetics can be passively derived: I will stand 
here and contemplate that painting, the painter’s brush strokes, the lighting across the canvas. 
Given that standing still is an experience, how did 
the fact you’d been standing in front of this or 
that paining for almost six hours influence your 
contemplation?
Aesthetics are experienced as interactive 
encounters across a plaza, beach boardwalk, 
approach to and arrival at a 20-story atrium. 
Aesthetic pleasures are every day, mundane experiences and not just those derived from the high 
arts. Also, when you think of it, your experiences 
filling 15 to 20 to 30 minutes leading up to your 
arrival at a building put you in a mood that likely 
colored your aesthetic state of mind which is 
either enhanced by the building once arrived at, 
or not. But not the other way around. You can’t 
have a building’s interior spaces you have yet to 
experience, color the landscape experience on the 
way to the building. Well, maybe you can if you 
read a critique of the architect’s interior or saw 
a documentary on television. But you still won’t 
escape the surrounding landscape’s tug as you 
approach the structure.
Professor of Aesthetics Arto Haapala recognizes life as involvement and the aesthetics of 
everyday life. 
The first step in the process of 
interpretation is making the 
Figure 7.4 Sedona’s Chapel of the Holy Cross. 
Shutterstock ID: 2094954961 Contributor:  
Angel DiBilio.
163
strange surroundings familiar. 
As I said, this is something we 
start to do as soon as we enter 
a new environment. Perhaps it 
is more appropriate to say that 
it starts to happen; first on a 
purely sensuous level – what we 
see and hear is not as striking 
as it first was; we get used to the 
visual and auditory features of 
the surroundings. We also start 
to recognize the functions and 
meanings of different buildings 
and sites: there is a shop, there 
is a school, kindergarten, 
police station, church, these 
are residential buildings, the 
market is there, the harbor 
further away, etc.
(Haapala, 2005, 47)
Haapala does mention “sites.” Yet, while he still 
gives architecture most of his attention, especially 
as related to other architecture, he does recognize the influences and pleasures associated with 
nature, fields, the sky, and birds (49). Even so, 
his recognition of landscape remains limited. All 
the “buildings” to which he refers are seen from a 
distance and preceded by and set in a landscape 
the character of which he admits is read and 
interpreted in ways that the individual’s state of 
mind (attitude, mood) is preparing them for their 
arrival at the respective structure or place.
However, a wonderful compilation of articles in New Zealand’s Landscape Review between 
1995 and 1998 finds landscape architects delving 
into landscape as text and landscape as narrative. Throughout the issues of Landscape Review 
there is a mutual understanding that cultural 
landscapes express themselves, at least express 
information that we often turn into stories. The 
difficulty is that the authors do not consider the 
progressive sequencing of statements that is narrative or storytelling. They focus on objects, scenes, 
and locations (places). What is “read” is read in, 
or as emanating from, an object much like visiting 
Plymouth Rock in Plymouth, Massachusetts and 
recalling the stories of the Pilgrims’ landing, sickness, death, barely surviving the first winter, interacting with the indigenous people. These again 
are stories associated with the object, Plymouth 
Rock. They are not the landscape narratives that 
come into play as people come to Plymouth to 
visit the rock; not the narratives people experience 
while planning their trip, arriving in downtown 
Plymouth or on the waterfront, walking through 
a residential or commercial area to the site as 
sounds of traffic compete with the ocean’s waves 
and fishing boats. The stories associated with 
objects or places do provide one with narratives 
but they are not the narratives that comprise The 
Analogy, the kind associated with eye-level serial 
vision seen by Bacon (1974) and Cullen (1961), 
the kind of sequential continuum experienced 
while getting to a destination.
While social and cultural geographers consider 
landscape texts at the pedestrian level, those in 
the landscape community tend to deal with landscape primarily as an academic subject. In the 
late 1960s and early 1970s with rising attention 
to literary criticism and literary theory, landscape 
architects gave more attention to the meta-­
theories than the substance of everyday life. There  
remains, however, an extensive body of related literature. The various authors may not refer to the 
landscape as a text, they likely don’t even mention 
it as a medium to be read, but they clearly deal 
with texts in the interpretations and arguments 
they construct of what exists as built and inhabited environments.
MESSAGE MEDIA
The fundamental qualities that allow basic design 
elements to be recognized are those that also 
provide contrast and give character to a landscape 
text. The characteristics of the individual media 
used to express parts of a design are the ­phonemes 
164
and morphemes of the landscape-as-text vocabulary. These are the smallest units of expression that 
cannot be further subdivided. In basic design, 
what is it about graphite that distinguishes it as 
a unique medium from, say, charcoal? The same 
question can be applied to landscape materials: 
pea gravel vs. coarse gravel vs. sand, teak vs. oak 
vs. pine, types of concrete vs. their particular 
applications and finishes.
Phonemes: any of the 
perceptually distinct units of 
sound in a specified language 
that distinguish one word from 
another, for example p, b, d, 
and t in the English words pad, 
pat, bad, and bat.
(see https://www.dictionary.
com/browse/phonemes, viewed 
March 2022)
 Morphemes: any of the 
minimal grammatical units of 
a language, each constituting a 
word or meaningful part of a 
word, that cannot be divided 
into smaller independent 
grammatical parts, as the, 
write, or the -ed of waited.
(see https://www.dictionary.
com/browse/morphemes, viewed 
March 2022)
Whether paint or vegetation, stone or milled 
lumber, brick or fabric, the discernible qualities of 
a media, and by that I mean discernible by our five 
senses, enable the communication (expression) of 
functional messages, personal identity, regional 
character, and national ideology. Media selection 
and manipulation allow artists and designers to 
express statements, talk with their work, test ideas 
with other artisans, and express themselves to the 
public. How materials are shaped and their surfaces finished express cultural values and myths, 
they are also more typically expressions of such 
idiosyncrasies as local nuances in personal taste 
and personal character. It is like peeling back 
the wallpaper in the living room of a 200-yearold house. With a little research you can identify 
the approximate years each layer was applied and 
wonder about the homeowners’ taste.
Within the logic with which messages are 
initiated through the selection of basic materials, we quickly realize the link between intended 
messages and a narrowing in the number and 
kinds of materials from which we can chose. The 
shapes, colors, and textures associated with gaiety 
would not support such activity spaces as a contemplative garden, a cemetery or mausoleum, or 
a Shakespearean theater. Well, depending upon 
the play. This realization also works to dispel the 
notion that good design is haphazard. Of course, 
a corollary is that when design is haphazard the 
narrative is weak, people are likely confused and 
potentially disoriented. I’d argue even further that 
neither professional nor nonprofessional work 
recognized as good design is haphazard. Luck 
and intuition do play a role in the design process, 
but by no means the primary role. Designs that 
are both appropriate to their settings and cohesive across their activity settings are rarely if ever 
derived solely from random ideas or insights or 
personal opinion instead of decisions made on 
observed facts.
It is well known that 
smoothness is always an 
attribute of perfection because 
its opposite reveals a technical 
and typically human operation 
of assembling.
(Barthes, 1972, 88)
As stated earlier, at the detailed end of the 
­elementary-landscape scale the purity of mathe165
matics does not set well with designers. Someone 
could have a lot of fun rewriting the entire 
theory of design if they were to apply mathematical definitions to it: points have no dimensions, lines no width only length, and planes 
no thickness. When aspects of size and scale 
are considered, any effort to come to strict definitions of points, lines, planes, and volumes 
takes on a Zen-like aura. The questions raised, 
however, while complicated in the ambiguity of 
their answers, provide for important and valuable discussions to improve our understanding 
of design. The value of exploring such questions 
as, “When is a sidewalk an edge and when is it a 
linear area? When is a hedge row a vertical plane 
or linear volume?” How do we come to understand what makes up design and how to apply it 
to the narrative form called landscape design? In 
what follows, the answers to such questions help 
illuminate a myriad of applications and interpretations of each basic design unit making up 
landscapes as narratives.
NARRATIVE BASICS
In the multiplicity of messages associated with any 
medium over time, there are fundamental forms 
associated with fundamental messages: gateway, 
positions of power associated with speaker’s height 
above a crowd, and clan, family, and tribal gathering sites. The more basic the media in which they 
are worked the more collective are people’s interpretative responses to those forms: understanding 
the work’s existence or reason for being. The previous thought reflects the recognition in oral traditions that the more generic a story’s message the 
greater the variation in characters and locations’ 
settings expressed over time while maintaining 
the original overall story/message.
Although fiction, I take James Michener’s 
The Source (1965) as an excellent example of 
the power of a place to which people gathered 
time and again for millennia: Stonehenge, Mesa 
Verde, and Machu Pichu are other examples of 
places of power. Similarities in people’s reactions, 
across cultures, evoked in specific landscapes and 
architecture give credence to the existence of 
archetypes: the “‘first form’ or ‘original model’ as 
it exists as a basis for all later variations and combinations” (Thiis—Evensen, 1987, 17). 
Archetypes are not inborn 
ideas, but ‘typical forms of 
behavior which, once they 
become conscious, naturally 
present themselves as ideas 
Figure 7.5 Stonehenge, a prehistoric monument in the fields of Wiltshire, England. Photo 
by author.
Figure 7.6 Machu Picchu is a 15th-century 
Inca citadel. Photo by Karen Shields.
166
and images, like everything 
else that becomes a content of 
consciousness.’ Archetypes have 
an organizing influence (my 
emphasis) on images and ideas.
(Storr, 1983, 16)
“Jung came to think of archetypes…as organizers…[that] ‘manifest themselves only through 
their ability to organize images and ideas’” (Storr, 
1983, 25). This organizing, or gathering, power 
is the quality echoed in Christopher Alexander’s 
elementary patterns. Elementary patterns are 
such because they “occur over and over again in 
our environment.” However, the singular nature 
of their core forms can be used a “million times 
over, without ever doing it the same way twice” 
(Alexander, 1977, x). Elementary patterns are 
themselves identified by the even more basic 
characteristics of frequency and repetitiveness 
over time and space. In addition, each time we 
use a landscape feature without changing it we in 
fact reinforce its existence, its message(s), and the 
authority (longstanding cultural belief) behind 
them.
In reference to the Villa Lante’s 
axial water feature, Moore says: 
The main glory of the garden is 
its axis of water…the journey 
is a curious one, since it starts 
most of the way down the axis, 
and the goal is ambiguous – 
either the source up the hill 
or the magnificent fountain 
below, toward which the water 
drops.
(Moore et al., 1988, 147)
In the gathering power of points is our recognition that they can’t stand alone. Most usually 
points as intersections or landmarks are tied to 
circulation patterns if not lines of sight. Axes not 
only link points of origin and destination visually 
but usually allow for people to move either alongside the axis or in the axis itself. The former is 
an interesting point in the case of the Kashmir 
garden Shalamar Bagh. “The main pathways are 
placed on either side of the canal. This means of 
course, that you cannot walk on the axis but are 
always slightly offset from it…Only the ducks 
cross the axis without formality” (Moore et al., 
1988, 171). Of interest is that nature, in the form 
of the ducks, has a freedom to roam that we do 
not feel we have in our confinement to linear 
walkways.
The ability of points to collect people, or 
provide for activities, calls for a progression of 
people-people and people-environment interactions. The type of interactions, and certain of 
the procedures associated with the interactions, is 
usually expressed along the route leading to the 
point. At human scale that information may be 
read by a person with both arms and hands free, 
as opposed to someone carrying two bags of groceries, pushing a shopping cart or a carriage, or 
on crutches or in a wheelchair. Each, given their 
stature and abilities, looks at the landscape ahead 
Figure 7.7 The Water Chain at the Villa Lante, 
Bagnaia, Viterbo, Italy. Photo by author.
167
and asks “Can I get to where I wish to go?” “How 
should I prepare for what I will encounter along 
the way?” “Once I get there, will I be able to 
carry out my wishes?” even as questions, these are 
expectations looking to be met. At the vehicular 
scale the information says whether the vehicle can 
enter, turn, backup. Imagine riding your bicycle 
to work. You get to the fire house and the bell goes 
off. You climb up into the back end of the ladder 
truck and off you go. You’re the tillerman. As you 
leave the station, do you read the environment the 
same way you did while riding your bicycle? Both 
realms of information are communicated along a 
progression, a linear progression of spatial information further defined by features containing the 
volumetric spaces, or those areas delineated by 
edges.
READING THE LANDSCAPE
The Analogy builds upon our tacit understanding of how we organize stories into recognizable 
narrative forms such as technical or comedic, 
meditative, or recreational. By reflecting on how 
we regularly read landscapes we bring our unspoken understanding of design into the open. Once 
made conscious, we can then explore a design as a 
new and unknown subject from the comfortably 
familiar surroundings of what we do day in and 
day out. With the change in perspective comes a 
shift from “what do I do to make this place look 
good?” to “what does this place need to communicate its messages well?” both here and now, 
and within its larger story (surrounding context). 
Answering that question immediately calls for an 
understanding of “what” is to be communicated. 
The answer to that question brings to the beginning of the design process what is usually found 
toward the end. Knowing what your design needs 
to communicate guides your design decisions in 
such a way that the overall design gains in continuity, coherency, and consistency.
…became more deliberate and 
watchful. He often stopped 
to examine the trees; nor did 
he cross a rivulet without 
attentively considering the 
quantity, the velocity, and the 
color of the waters. Distrusting 
his own judgment, his appeals 
to the opinion of Chingachgook 
were frequent and earnest.
(Cooper, 1980, 252)
The fact that we read our environments should 
be inescapable by now. If we fail to interpret the 
signs, signals, and symbols then we are unable to 
recognize gateways, walkways, doorways, overlooks, and how to get there. If this wasn’t true, 
then we would find piles of bodies, bicycles, and 
cars where paths and roads intersect, we’d have 
students and faculty standing around loading 
docks rather than the main entrances waiting 
for libraries to open, and we’d have parking lots 
where the parks should be, and God knows where 
we’d find the parks.
Their advance was rapid; and 
made with as much confidence 
as a traveler would proceed 
along a wide highway. If a 
rock, or a rivulet, or a bit of 
earth harder than common, 
severed the links of the clue 
they followed, the true eye of 
the scout recovered them at a 
distance, and seldom rendered 
the delay of a single moment 
necessary.
(Cooper, 1980, 253)
At the completion of an architecture student’s presentation of his design of a new library structure on the 
University of Kentucky campus, I asked, “Imagine 
coming around the corner of this ­building,” a build168
ing 60–70 yards away from his proposed library. I 
pointed to it and located him at a point that caused 
him to see two sides of his building. One side 
included the main entrance. I continued, 
And, imagine you wanted to 
use the library and it was your 
first time going there. From 
this location, as you scan the 
building’s two facades, where 
would you likely walk to if you 
were searching out the library’s 
main entrance?
Looking over his elevations, his classmates began 
to chuckle. He even admitted he would walk 
toward the large darkened rectangular areas delineated by the sunlit, highlighted fenestration: the 
library’s loading dock. While the activity spaces of 
his structure were well organized and interrelated, 
he had not considered how people would read the 
signals – lines, outlines, and darkened areas of his 
design – as they approached the building.
People make attachments 
to places that are critical to 
their well-being or distress. 
An individual’s sense of place 
is both a biological response 
to the surrounding physical 
environment and a cultural 
creation, as geographer  
Yi-Fu Tuan has argued. 
From childhood, humans 
come to know places through 
engaging all five senses, sight 
as well as sound, smell, touch, 
and taste… simultaneous 
engagement of several senses in 
orientation and wayfinding.
(Hayden, 1995, 16)
At our most pragmatic level we read both built and 
natural landscapes. While the former is authored and 
the latter is (in a sense) not, natural environments 
can still read at various levels of detail. Any how-to 
books dealing with woodland survival or living off 
the land provide ready examples of how to read the 
woods (Nesbitt et al., 1959). Satellite images and the 
forms, tones, and textures in aerial photographs are 
read, information is organized, data are analyzed, 
and conclusions are reached. Doug Way, in Terrain 
Analysis (1973), uses the opportunity to identify 
particular drainage patterns as seen in aerial  photographs. He shows how each drainage pattern is the 
signature of a particular subsurface parent material 
and the specific soil composition to which it gives 
rise. In conjunction with the identified vegetation 
Way determines the land uses for which a particular 
locale are best suited with regard to particular soil 
structure, soil load-bearing capacity, and subsurface 
parent materials.
At a more down-to-earth level, May Theilgaard 
Watts, Reading the Landscape of America (1975), 
Figure 7.8 Message delivery sequence. Drawn 
by author.
169
provides “readings” of a wonderful spectrum of 
landscapes, from the natural settings of “Canyon 
Story” and “Picnic in a Gritty Wind” to the 
humanly altered landscapes of “Readin’, Ritin’, 
and Recess” and “Looking Down on Improved 
Property.” With similar powers of observation, 
a civil engineer I once worked with amazed me 
(something I shouldn’t, as a landscape architect, 
admit to) with how he could, from a mile or more 
distant, identify the vegetation on a site. Once 
identified, he would go on to describe the area’s 
soil type and moisture level, birds and animals 
inhabiting the place, their culture, and the advantages and disadvantages we’d have with the construction processes we were preparing to propose.
At an even more personal level, both fiction 
and non-fiction are replete with examples of environments being read by the stories’ characters. 
Authors rely not only on a reader’s ability to visually construct the environments in which their 
characters are set, remember Ichabod Crane’s galloping ahead of the headless horseman through 
Sleepy Hollow, but also on the readers’ ability to 
enhance their images by appealing to memories 
held by their other senses. Edgar Allen Poe and 
Sarah Orne Jewett are only two of many writers 
who orchestrate their readers’ sensual memories 
to the benefit of their imaginations. As you read 
the following, consider which of your senses are 
being (re)called into Jewett’s story, The Country of 
the Pointed Firs.
It was a queer little garden 
and puzzling to a stranger, 
the few flowers being put at 
a disadvantage by so much 
greenery; but the discovery 
was soon made that Mrs. 
Todd was an ardent lover of 
herbs…the sea breezes blew 
into the low end-window of 
the house laden with not only 
sweet-brier and sweet-mary, 
but balm and sage and borage 
and mint, wormwood and 
southernwood. If Mrs. Todd 
had occasion to step into the 
far corner of her herb plot, she 
trod heavily upon thyme, and 
made its fragrant presence 
known with all the rest…You 
could always tell when she 
was stepping out there, even 
when you were half awake in 
the morning, and learned to 
know, in the course of a few 
weeks’ experience, in exactly 
which corner of the garden 
she might be.
(1956, 14)
Figure 7.9 Canyon Story in Reading the Landscape of America (Watts, 1975, 50). Courtesy of 
the Estate of May Theilgaard Watts.
170
Jewett provides us with an olfactory garden, or 
what could, just for fun, be referred to as a geography of the nose. Jewett introduces the potential of an olfactory text and its use in locating 
people within a landscape. Landscape designers 
could easily transpose Jewett’s geography of the 
nose into a powerfully subliminal landscape. I can 
easily imagine a choreography across a landscape 
based on aromas.
What with so many people’s limited attention 
to the world around them, even more now with 
their attention to their smartphones and social 
media, residential sites and even urban streets 
and plazas could be made into subtle olfactory 
landscapes. Walls where people sit, areas through 
which short cuts are taken, and intersections 
where people gather, once planted with scented 
herbs, would become locations, or landmarks, of 
memorable scents and aromas. As I leave for work 
each morning and return each evening, brushing 
against the lemon-scented herbs planted alongside where I park my van, the aromas enhance 
the planting’s visual farewells and welcomes home 
with wonderful scents.
Poe, however, uses our five senses to help his 
readers locate the depths of the fears to which 
they allow themselves to be brought as they read 
“The Pit and the Pendulum.” Identify which of 
your five senses he brings into this paragraph:
In the confusion attending 
my fall…and while I still lay 
prostrate…my chin rested 
upon the floor of the prison, 
but my lips, and the upper 
portion of my head…touched 
nothing. At the same time, my 
forehead seemed bathed in a 
clammy vapor, and the peculiar 
smell of decayed fungus arose 
to my nostrils. I put forward 
my arm…I had fallen at the 
very brink of a circular pit, 
whose extent, of course, I had 
no means of ascertaining…I 
succeeded in dislodging a small 
fragment [of masonry wall], 
and let it fall into the abyss. 
For many seconds I harkened to 
its reverberations as it dashed 
against the sides of the chasm 
in its descent; at length, there 
was a sullen plunge into water, 
succeeded by loud echoes. 
At the same moment, sound 
resembling a quick opening 
and as rapid closing of a 
door overhead, while a faint 
gleam of light flashed suddenly 
through the gloom, and as 
suddenly faded away.
(Poe, 1904, 13)
While I periodically relate aspects of landscape 
as text to theories of narration and communication, The Analogy primarily focuses on the texts 
through which people’s encounters with their 
environments occur and are made possible in 
the landscapes of everyday life. The seduction of 
entering into academic explorations of the importance of structuration theory (Giddens, 1984), 
deconstruction (Derrida, 1978), and communication theories (Giddens, 1984; Habermas, 1981) 
as they inform landscape as text and narration is 
great. But at this time such explorations must be 
left to others with the hope that they jump into 
what I see as both a necessary exploration and 
debate valuable to the design professions and 
those they serve.
At this point we have recognized the interdependent links tying the character of designed 
features with the character of the messages they 
express. Integral to this interdependence is the 
association that binds the object world with both 
171
our meaning-full and value-laden social and personal worlds. That association is both temporal and spatial. Learned over time, and through 
numerous encounters, the interdependence of 
particular shapes, colors, textures, objects, and 
their respective meanings is temporal. In a sense, 
temporary to a place and a time. Europeans’ 
rapidly changing associations regarding the New 
World between the late 1500s and early 1600s 
exemplify the temporality of meanings and place 
(Marx, 1981, 73–145). A landscape made up of 
parts of different older landscapes, parts of which 
are seen as making up portions of the newer one, 
is referred to as a palimpsest. I believe it was 
originally a painterly term referring to a painter 
adding bits of new layers on top of the original 
layer which shows through the newer ones.
pal·imp·sest [ˈpaləm(p)ˌsest] 
NOUN, Geography Word  
of the Week: Palimpsest – 
While palimpsest often refers 
to a writing material on which 
the original script has been 
erased (though not completely) 
and written over again, in 
geography, the word means a 
place or landscape in which 
something new is superimposed 
over traces of something 
preceding it [parts of which 
show through].
(Canadian Geographic, 
2015)
The recent fury in the United States over what 
constitutes art and whether it is of sufficient value 
to be supported with Federal funds is another 
example of the almost fickle nature of people’s 
object-meaning associations. Fickle or not there 
are still rules guiding actions and related outcomes.
Images of America over a 
couple hundred years went 
from merciless, howling, 
cannibal-infested darkness 
to “the master symbol of the 
garden…expressing fecundity, 
growth, increase, and blissful 
labor.”
(Marx, 1981, 142)
Syntax and grammar guide the quality of the 
interrelationship between individual words 
and the sentences in which their messages are 
developed. Each of the arts has its own design 
principles, all which rest upon their socio-cultural psychology of perception (Arnheim, 1969; 
Gombrich, 1972; Wolff, 1981). As our culture 
changed so have we as a society. What early colonists and settlers valued and what they saw centuries ago in their landscapes that were and were 
not there is quite different now (Marx, 1981). 
The principles guiding acceptable dance, eating 
behaviors and food preparation, music, and 
landscape design are always evolving. We are the 
seeds of our future and the fruits of our past.
Apparently, an unverified 
statement, but it has been going 
around for a long time: And 
in some parts of New England, 
serving lobster to prison 
inmates more than once a week 
was forbidden by law, as doing 
so was considered cruel and 
unusual punishment.
(https://www.reddit.
com/r/AskHistorians/
comments/11hakg/lobster_for_
prisoners_cruel_and_unusual/)
172
The good news is that the guiding principles are 
tied to society and with even a limited degree of 
accuracy we can interpret artifacts and identify 
a society’s valued structures, appreciations, and 
the forms with which society identifies (Yamin 
and Metheny, 1996). This culturally based 
approach to landscape-as-text is what makes 
Potteiger and Purinton’s (1998) Landscape 
Narratives. What they present as readings of 
images, signs, and symbols requires the “reader” 
have a background in the history and cultural 
evolution of the society responsible for the landscape texts being read. This is not The Analogy. 
The Analogy is about reading everyday landscapes by everyday participants such as tourists 
and local residents. Walking or driving along 
the route of Paul Revere’s ride does not require 
you know the story. But avoiding being hit by a 
car or truck does require you be able to read the 
roadway-traffic narrative.
Locally available materials, period styles and 
production, and social practices are themselves 
mediated by cultural conventions. Personal 
expressions are formed through social and aesthetic codes (Rapoport, 1969; 1982; Wolff, 
1981). The daily transformation of cultural 
conventions forms and informs more than 
the world of art (Wolff, 1981); it is found in 
cities (Domosh, 1996) and the fiction embedded in the cities (Sharpe and Wallock, 1987). 
Normative codes formulate the character and 
context of our myths about Martians (Barthes, 
1979, 27–29) and other cultures (Lowenthal 
and Bowden, 1976). Each of these environmental manifestations of values, beliefs, and understandings contributes to the production of texts 
read and reread, whether urban form (Alexander, 
1979; Smith, 1977) or mythic image (Bacon, 
1974; Campbell, 1974).
Manipulating a medium is itself an act of 
reading, or more to the point, learning how to 
read it. We are not born with this capability. We 
learn the grammar of the media with which we 
work. As for selecting our parents, we have little 
choice. We are born into our culture and our language and the signs and symbols through which 
they are expressed. Each medium comes with its 
basic characteristics, they are the resources that 
await our arrival and our experimentation in an 
effort to learn their potentials. A child learns how 
to recognize, identify, and interpret audio and 
visual qualities that make up particular types of 
objects and language units. Babble becomes language, erratic behavior becomes dance, crayon 
scribbles on floors and walls give way to painting, and for some PB&J transforms into culinary 
delights. Not that PB&J isn’t a delight. A sculptor interprets the potentials held in the crystalline structure of a stone, a scout follows a trail 
(Cooper, 1980), or an interpreter of aerial photos 
or satellite images recognizes what is referred to 
as a signature on the ground (Way, 1973). In 
each instance signature patterns become identifiable through a repetition of encounters over time 
(Dondis, 1973, 2–12).
[Henry Moore remembers] 
Then I had to think in the same 
way that Michelangelo might 
have done, so that one had to 
wait until the idea came that 
fitted the shape of the stone and 
that was seen, the idea, in that 
block.
(Bronowski, 1973, 115)
When Henry Moore, like Michelangelo, sought 
his next sculpture, it is said he would look for a 
particular piece of granite that held within it what 
he envisioned as the final sculpture. In theory, all 
he would then need to do is remove the excess. 
Actually, his work displayed his knowledge of the 
crystalline structure of a stone, how it would and 
would not fracture from chisel blows from this or 
that angle, and the surface finishes it would allow 
him to produce. Moore expressed the idea of 
reading what a medium brought him, not imposing his thoughts on it through his tools. In the 
stone’s crystalline grain he recognized the sculpture’s existence and the ways he would direct his 
tools to bring (by subtraction) the sculpted form 
to the surface. 
173
Of course, it cannot be literally 
true that what the sculptor 
imagines and carves out is 
already there, hidden in the 
block. And yet the metaphor 
tells the truth about the 
relation of discovery that exists 
between man and nature…
Discovery is a double relation 
of analysis and synthesis 
together. As an analysis, it 
probes for what is there; but 
then, as a synthesis, it puts 
the parts together in a form 
by which the creative mind 
transcends the bare limits, 
the bare skeleton, that nature 
provides.
(Bronowski, 1973, 115)
The ideal driving planning and design is that the 
solution is massaged out of rather than imposed 
upon a given situation. The end product appears 
not to have been designed, e.g., the forests 
designed by Frederick Law Olmsted surrounding 
the Biltmore Estate in Ashville, North Carolina.
People and place, heritage and habitat, are 
the resources a designer’s creative energies weave 
into a design. Carried into the realm of ecology, 
an approach to design and planning that works 
within a given situation supports the concept of 
sustainable design: working with the natural and 
social dynamics of a situation, rather than against 
them. This is the basis of the permaculture movement (Mollison, 1988; Morgan, 2006) and the 
rise of ecological concepts as applied to production and commerce (Hawken, 1993).
Carried to its logical conclusion, such designed 
environments, ones that work within the existing 
ecological dynamics of a site’s location, minimize 
the costs and time spent in ongoing maintenance. 
Good designs are like conduits. Through them 
pass the existing energy flows of the place and 
the people the designs influence. Done well, an 
introduced design does not interrupt the existing energy flows. Much of the natural and social 
dynamics of a place are sustained and perpetuated. This is where the creativity of landscape 
architectural design resides, along that balance 
beam where things change but relationships don’t, 
in that realm of dynamic equilibrium. This means 
that designers, as part of their typical project 
inventory and analysis, need to become familiar 
with the sensate vocabularies of the place in which 
their project is located.
When I (Bob Scarfo) asked 
for a definition of dynamic 
equilibrium, a Reardon, WA 
6th grader told me how he 
saw it in he and his brother’s 
bedroom. “We make piles of 
dirty clothes that our mom 
takes away, washes, folds, and 
puts on our shelves which we 
then take, wear, and make 
more piles of dirty clothes. 
That’s dynamic equilibrium, 
the room keeps changing but 
always looks the same.” Yes, 
this definition came from a 6th 
grade student. 
NARRATIVE
Like the opportunities brought forth through 
growth, and the opportunities associated with 
the cycling of seasons, communication’s dynamic 
quality allows us the potential to manipulate narrative materials to fit a variety of situations over a 
variety of times. This aspect of change over time is 
174
found in folklore and wonderfully suits landscape 
architecture since it deals with plants that change 
over time. Over time we may tell the same story 
in many different ways, or we may tell different 
stories in the same way. This cyclical growth, of 
maturing, is found in each of us. In so many ways 
we are each the same person we were years ago, 
while in many other ways we are different. Note 
Joseph Campbell’s identification of the similar 
structures, but different settings and characters, in 
various cultures’ myths, in Hero with a Thousand 
Faces (1949). Rubin also helps us recognize commonalities of expressive themes across the epics 
found in oral traditions (1995), and Bettina 
Knapp’s Archetype, Architecture, and the Writer, in 
which she analyzes archetypes used by architects 
to fit their needs (1986).
Poseidon’s trident (which in 
India is Śiva’s) became thus 
the Devil’s popular pitchfork; 
Poseidon’s great bull, sire of the 
Minotaur (In India, Shiva’s 
bull Nandi) gave the Devil 
his cloven foot and horns; the 
very name, Hades, of the god 
of the underworld became a 
designation of that inferno 
which Heinrich Zimmer once 
described wittily as  
‘Mr. Lucifer’s luxury 
skyscraper apartment-hotel for 
lifers…
(Campbell, 1968, 20–21)
The flexibility of grammar, in combination with 
our imagination, allows us to draw on the finite 
resource of our vocabulary and create a seemingly 
endless variety of messages and types of messages: 
poetic, technical, romantic, and financial, to name 
a few. In the same way that life is not a single photograph,  messages are not singular expressions. 
Accents and exclamations are not solitary, fixed 
points in time or space. They are part of a larger 
continuum, a narrative. The highlight of flowering dogwoods in the Virginia woodlands of spring 
is fleeting, but they are part of a greater seasonal 
and, in turn, annual narrative. Over time their 
color accents even move, through succession, 
moving into and across once plowed fields. Sun 
angles, where the sun rises and sets, what is illuminated and what isn’t in the course of a day, a 
month, a year, also vary greatly. Taking advantage 
of the dynamic qualities of these natural exclamations requires knowing both the grammar and 
the syntax of a landscape’s resources, cycles, and 
successions.
In the retelling, or rereading, of a built environment, similar messages can change from one 
location to another and from one time to another. 
Our ability to read their messages, even when 
they vary from place to place, is as much a factor 
of the organization of the place’s basic vocabulary 
as it is a factor of what preceded and succeeded 
them. Common examples include the apron areas 
in front of doors, entries to outdoor public gathering places, and sitting areas. Doorway aprons 
are typically wider and of a different material than 
the walk that led up to them. Even with universal 
design, they are often raised and have an overhead 
canopy to provide protection from the weather 
and a sense of arrival at a private place aside from 
the more public walkway.
Outdoor public gathering places, again, are 
usually preceded by a paved area larger than the 
entryway it precedes. The area is signaled by and 
distinguished from adjacent areas by changes in 
paving patterns, if not also the materials used. 
People mill about, get their bearings, find friends, 
and then move toward a smaller entry area flanked 
by posts, towers, or some such vertical features. 
The towers may house ticket booths. They echo 
the columns often seen flanking a gated entryway. Sitting areas are also often found physically 
separated. A seating area may be adjacent to but 
outside of a walkway’s stream of traffic. It may 
be completely separated from the walkway with 
plantings between the bench and the walk. Other 
benches may be located right on the walkway, but 
again a different paving material or pattern often 
175
visually separates it from the circulation portion 
of the walkway. The stability of the planes, verticals, points, textures over time and between 
places are what allows us to read similar, yet new, 
environments with a degree of personal safety and 
security. By stability I mean they have survived 
the test of time. People have for years successfully 
read the messages. The messages expressed an 
understandable story and the appropriateness of 
what they expressed didn’t call for any user editing 
(making changes to the landscape features or what 
we sometimes refer to as vandalism).
Expectations can be used to, in 
a phrase, trip you up:
….small design detail of the 
stairway – the so-called false 
step. The riser of the false step 
was one inch higher than the 
other steps so that it would 
trip up anybody unfamiliar 
Figures 7.10.1–7.10.5 A succession of arrival points providing for a holistic experiential flow. Hallgrimskirkja Lutheran (Church of Iceland), Reykjavik, Iceland. Photos by author.
176
with it and serve as a primitive 
burglar alarm.
(Berendt, 1994, 63)
The aspect of stability, or consistency, in form 
and structure on which many of our built environments are based is also fundamental to our 
oral traditions. The counting-out rhyme, Eenie, 
meenie, miney, mo, “remained stable for over 
a century. There have been only two systematic 
changes” (Rubin, 1995, 4). The word “hollers” 
is not a British word and has, in the United 
Kingdom, been changed to “squeals.” The word 
“tiger” replaced an admittedly derogatory social 
connotation. In epic poetry, many poems are 
not as stable, in the strict sense. “The plot, the 
rhythm, the general cast of characters, the formulaic descriptions of characters and places…remain 
stable, but the exact words sung do not” (Rubin, 
1995, 4). The epic poem’s basic organization, as 
with many of the spaces that comprise our built 
environments, remains the same at the practical 
level. The repetition over time, from one generation to the next, of the makeup of our most cherished spaces and collective experiences, is the basis 
of much of what comes to be our heritage and 
personal and familial histories. From the routine 
of shared stories, and shared physical features, 
we acquire a sense of orientation, of belonging. 
When a place’s vocabulary, and the structural 
organization of that vocabulary varies, we often 
sense something as being “out of place” or, to 
quote Dorothy, “Toto, I’ve a feeling we’re not in 
Kansas anymore.”
Eenie, meenie, miney, mo,
Catch a tiger by the toe,
If he hollers, let him go,
Eenie, meenie, miney, mo.
(Rubin, 1995, 227)
 
Now I lay me down to sleep,
I pray the Lord my soul to keep;
If I should die before I wake,
I pray the Lord my soul to take.
(Anonymous, 12th century)
 
SPOKANE, Wash. – A new 
stop sign at the intersection of 
High Dr. and Grand Blvd. 
has been confusing for many 
drivers on Spokane’s South 
Hill.
 
Where drivers used to be able 
[for decades] to turn onto High 
Dr. from Grand Blvd. without 
stopping, a “traffic revision 
ahead” sign warns them about 
the added road sign.
 
But this sign doesn’t seem to be 
enough to remind some drivers 
to stop before continuing 
through the intersection.
(Waltower, 2019)
In design, as in communication, there are basic 
narrative structures that when followed contribute to the survival of oral histories across thousands of years (Rubin, 1995). Contrary to most 
students’, and many practitioners’ reactions to the 
idea that design involves constraints in no way 
diminishes the creativity called upon for designers to narrate place messages of intense personal, 
social, and cultural significance. In realizing the 
sensual language (the role of the five senses in 
reading a landscape) that is a users’ social context, 
in combination with the expressive capabilities of 
vegetation and building materials to be used in 
a design, a designer acquires a sense of freedom. 
That freedom comes with knowing what media 
are available and their capabilities and knowing 
the limits of what will and will likely not be 
177
understood, appreciated, and sustained by the 
users of a design. By working with the social character of a people and a place, and this can also 
mean consciously working against the character 
of the design’s contexts – the operative word being 
“consciously” – artisans are able to interpret and 
record emotions into narratives that can be identified, read, and appreciated by the landscape users.
Marc Treib notes the downfall of taking things 
out of context to create a design. He specifically 
refers to designers reproducing early earth sculptures in modern environments. 
In borrowing primitive 
forms without their systems 
of significance, by wrenching 
them from their settings and 
their societies, we risk confusing 
syntax for semantics…in 
the process, we can acquire 
only a representation of a 
representation, compounding 
the entropic process and the 
dissolution of meaning.
(1991, 107)
The built forms of late 
nineteenth-century New York 
City and Boston differed 
dramatically. New York’s 
landscape exemplified the 
ultimate material expression 
of a capitalist city…unlimited 
expansion, both horizontal 
and vertical…a neverending search for outlets of 
conspicuous consumption, 
using their residences and 
commercial buildings as 
the most evident forms of 
display…In contrast, Boston’s 
bourgeois class fashioned 
their city and its landscape 
into a cultural capital and 
center of intellectual society. 
The expansion of commercial 
districts was limited by 
certain civic values that were 
translated into a ban on 
skyscraper construction and 
regulations that prevented the 
[commercial] development of 
the Boston Common.
(Domosh, 1996, 1)
As social products, interior and landscape spaces 
form and inform both their designers and their 
users. Like words in a narrative, landscape spaces 
are storage bins of thoughts, values, and the 
ideologies and local biographies of particular 
people, places, and periods of time. Landscapes 
and their spaces are expressions of power (Louis 
XIV’s Versailles’ axis cut to the horizon, and the 
Vanderbilt estate near Ashville, NC), of subtlety 
(the park lands of Olmsted or Jens Jensen), of sensitivity (many ecotourism resorts), and of obscenity (grid—like clear-cuts, canals cut for oil barges 
through Texas swamplands, altered ecologies in 
the name of recreation). When people read spatial 
messages as appropriate to their personal, social, 
and ecological contexts, the dialogue between 
people and place is one that sustains the place. A 
design that respects and works with those systems 
basically cares for itself. Dialogue in this sense is 
the interaction of people with their surroundings. 
When the messages are inappropriate, the dialogue is one of negative critique. It takes the form 
of people making changes to their surroundings. 
People altering environments do so to suit their 
sense of identity. Two well-documented examples 
178
are found in Mona Domosh’s, Inventing Cities: 
The Creation of Landscape in Nineteenth-Century 
New York and Boston (1996) and in John Reps’ 
account of the squaring of Circleville (1969, 
300–305).
We modify our environments to suit our personal and collective sense of Self to the point 
that such places – front yard, backyard, patio, 
office – reflect who we are, our personality. As 
designers, we do not work in a vacuum. But as 
designers, and to the benefit of our clients and 
eventual design users, we must be able to step 
outside our personal heritage and put it aside 
as best we can. Design is an act and a product 
derived from social-cultural and ecological contexts which at times are not our own. Languages 
are set within cultures, including professions, religions, street gangs, and the like. Some read left 
to right, some top to bottom. Our very appreciation of form and flow is likely influenced by 
the graphic symbols that comprise our alphabets: 
Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, and Indo-Iranian. We 
also grow up within the language boundaries of 
place, time, occupation, and activity: technical, 
scientific, religious, romantic, economic, artistic, 
and more. As we go back further and further in 
time, the distinctions that brought us our specialized vocabularies blur. Art and science were not 
the severely distinguished areas of study, kinds of 
research methodologies, and specialized vocabularies they are today.
The rules of each street were 
set by different gangs. If I wore 
certain colors in the wrong 
neighborhood, I could get 
shot. If I wore my baseball cap 
slightly to the left or to the right 
in the wrong neighborhood, I 
could get shot. If I scratched 
my head and it looked like 
my fingers were making a 
certain gesture in the wrong 
neighborhood, I could get shot.
(Cooper, 2020, 1)
Erasmus Darwin, Charles’s father and a medical 
doctor, wrote up the results of his scientific experiments as poems. In this form the dissemination 
of his work educated the greater public to the 
emerging sciences (Jordanova, 1986, 159–203). A 
more contemporary example is found with Loren 
Eiseley. His anthropologist’s wonder with life had 
him negatively labeled by some as a mystic; his 
sense of awe expressed in his prosaic style was considered highly unscientific (Heuer, 1987, 161). 
Even fiction can be seen to convey new social and 
scientific knowledge and shifts in art appreciation 
and landscape design. In 1849, E. A. Poe, in his 
trilogy that opened with The Landscape Garden, 
educated his American readers to arguments in 
Britain and Europe regarding the Picturesque, 
Sublime, and Beautiful. Without them realizing 
it, he prepared his American readers to understand the forms of art coming to America.
Figure 7.11 The Redevelopment of Circleville, Ohio 1837-1856 (Reps, 1965, 302). Courtesy  
John Reps’ Estate.
179
Those who wrote about 
nature in the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries negotiated 
through their writings not 
only their relationships with 
their readers, but also their 
relationships with God, and 
with nature itself.
(Jordanova, 1986, 21)
 Loren [Eiseley] was criticized 
by his scientific colleagues 
for…venturing into the field 
of literature and appealing 
to the general reader. Other 
anthropologists had their 
careers hurt for similar 
writings: Margaret Mead for 
Coming of Age in Samoa  
and, more recently, Colin 
Turnbull for People of the 
Forest.
(Heuer, 1987, 160)
The particular ways in which cultures shape their 
landscape, architectural, and interior vocabularies become identified with styles such as 
Romanesque, Baroque, Elizabethan, Victorian, 
Modern, Post Modern, Zen, and West African 
Swept Yards (Westmacott, 1992; Raver, 1993). 
Crafted pieces and landscape spaces, like most 
written works, are specific to an individual 
people, region, and time. As designers, our 
boundaries of understanding expand through 
observation and interpretation; our experiences 
over time allow us to become familiar with a 
place’s vocabulary, syntax, and grammar. What 
we know about a place, our ability to accurately 
read constructed places, has the potential of 
expanding well beyond the period in which, and 
for whom, they were produced (Deetz, 1977). 
An archeology of kitchen dumps has enlarged 
our knowledge of the working spaces of historic 
Williamsburg, Virginia and the Black neighborhoods of Annapolis, Maryland (Leone, 2015). 
Archeology and anthropology are two ways in 
which we learn to read what landscapes can tell 
us (Yamin and Metheny, 1996).
As designers the narrative structure we carry 
about with us is both our resource and our 
baggage. Our ability to recognize it and hold 
it at bay while coming to know a people and a 
place is a skill rarely taught in design schools. 
Philosophers call this technique “bracketing,” 
that is to identify through self-reflection personal values and attitudes and then put them 
aside. A designer may be called upon to produce 
a design he or she would not want to live in 
but its users would be excited to live with and 
care for. Developing this skill of holding one’s 
value-laden landscape texts at bay is helped not 
only by anthropologists and archaeologists who 
delve into the past, but also by those who do 
more contemporary work in applied anthropology. Major differences exist in vocabulary, dialects, and diction between and within cultures 
in spoken and landscape languages. During 
my last visit to Germany, many older Germans 
were bemoaning the fact that their regional dialects were disappearing. The reason given for 
the homogenization of their language was the 
radio, television, film, and music industries’ use 
of High German. This raises the same question 
asked by Sharpe and Wallock in their Visions 
of the Modern City about interpreting modern 
urban landscapes. 
There is, moreover, an 
important temporal dimension 
to the problem of seeing 
the city clearly. How can 
the contemporary critic, a 
product of his own time and 
180
of the very forces he seeks to 
objectify, manage to cross the 
hermeneutic horizon separating 
him from the historical 
moment of his subject?
(Sharpe and Wallock, 1987, 9)
Many say it is impossible for us to read historic 
landscape texts.
When my University of Guelph students 
worked with an Ojibwa Cree band in Northern 
Ontario we often heard, “How can you design for 
them, you can never become one of them.” My 
response was that the critique was valid, but by 
working with the Cree, by reading their lore, 
asking questions, and observing their behaviors 
in nature we could bring our design talents more 
closely into line with their personal, tribal, and 
cultural values (Ndubisi, 1988). The results of 
our efforts would be a lot closer to an expression 
of the other’s structures, landscapes, and interior vocabularies than if we had not taken the 
time to be open to their environmental vocabularies and done our best to verify their spatial 
vocabularies through workshops and charrettes 
with the Cree.
NARRATIVE STRUCTURE
The idea of narrative structure is not unique. 
Structure is found in the literature and practice of 
the sciences, humanities, arts, and everyday life. 
Whether seen in science (Capra, 1982), rules of 
written and oral composition (Guth, 1961), creative problem solving (Gordon, 1961; Prince, 
1970), or the daily routines of life in a house 
(Wood and Beck, 1994), the structures are characterized by wholeness, transformation, and self-­
regulation (Chatman, 1990). In fact, once you 
start looking at books on urbanism, town planning, cinematography, writing, culture, consumerism, and just about anything you care to name you 
begin to realize that many of the works deal with 
structure in one way or another. Sure there are critiques questioning the structure discussed in each 
of the writings – Marxist, non-Marxist, Skinner, 
Jung, Freud, Duany, Calthorpe, Olmsted. Still, 
each is a way of understanding, and that is as much 
the key to learning to become a good designer as 
it is to practice good design. I no longer believe 
there is one right way to do design. Our goal is 
to find and become comfortable with a structure, 
maybe a mixture of approaches, that allows us 
to analyze, interpret, apply, and substantiate our 
expertise, one that works from within and does not 
impose outside values upon a people or a place. 
The Analogy is just one more structure to sample 
and hopefully adopt – at least parts of it.
Recognizing the possibility that landscape narratives have a structure opens up the potential of 
identifying a logical approach to doing landscape 
architectural design. A landscape’s narrative structure is shaped by a place’s theme, the activities it 
provides, and the user-reader’s expectations. In 
developing The Analogy I learned that a design 
process based upon narration calls for a proposed 
landscape’s narrative to lead the design process. 
After getting acquainted with the proposed 
design’s user group(s), client’s wishes, and local 
ecology and history, the designer-as-author writes 
a first- or second-person narrative based upon 
a landscape user’s expectations. The narrative 
doesn’t describe the expectations but allows us 
to follow the landscape user as he or she carries 
out activities that fulfill their expectations. 
Such a narrative leads the designer to select 
and orchestrate the activity spaces best suited 
to the site design’s theme and at least satisfy, if 
not excite, the user. Like writing a letter or short 
story, the question (design problem) you need 
to answer directs your character’s actions and, in 
so doing, gives you what needs to be said. Then 
you select and organize the particular grammar 
and syntax (word choice and message structure). 
There is a logic to this narrative-storyboard-­
design process that becomes evident in the built 
product and, in turn, in the narrative read by its 
users. When I say “logical approach” I infer two 
things. First, we are a step closer to that elusive 
formula I’ve been looking for: the writing of a 
first- or second-person narrative + its interpretation into a storyboard = an experientially based 
design. Second, and more importantly, this is an 
approach to doing design that can be replicated 
181
and in doing so culminate in good designs time 
and again.
Well-planned narratives begin with a first 
word, an opening scene, an initial musical note. 
Selected carefully, the first word sets an impression, a mood, a situation, and, we can say, a direction. This is both the power and the responsibility 
associated with starting points. A critical question that needs to be answered is, where, as one 
approaches a designed space, does she encounter 
the first message? Does it echo the mindset with 
which she approaches the site: determination, 
introspection, gaiety? Where does she get her first 
impression of the design that sets the stage for so 
much that follows? How does it develop from there 
on? Having the last word, the closing experience at 
the terminus of a series of spaces acts in a reciprocal 
manner. Their power and reciprocity between first 
and last experiences rely on the landscape user’s 
ability to draw together the site’s exit point with 
what came before. In film terms the user is looking 
for closure and in environmental design terminology, a continuity across the site. In terms of a lasting 
impression, I often asked a student struggling with 
a design, “It is three days after someone has visited 
your site. What would be the title of the article they 
write in a local paper about your design?”
What is being called for here is “Programming,” 
specifically a programming of the landscape users’ 
experiences that, through a first- or second-­person 
narrative, help you give form, character, and 
content to the proposed physical environment. 
Developing a strong program that addresses people’s experiences strengthens your understanding 
of the users, the activities they’ll likely perform, 
and their expectations. Instead of numbers of 
people to be accommodated and the quantities of 
spaces and materials that need to accommodate 
them in particular activities, we consider a design 
program that anticipates people’s experiences 
as an expression of their needs. Considering the 
quantities and areas that will be needed is dealt 
with after you have seen through your user’s eyes 
what the site looks like.
This is the kind of background research needed 
to write a good narrative. It provides for “the definition and analysis of human needs” (Motloch, 
1991, 296). A narrative’s building blocks, from 
the smallest unit to the final chapter in a volume, 
interrelated in ways that provide a wholeness, a 
completeness, a continuity of flow, and a sense of 
closure. With this background you are prepared, 
as Rae says, to partner with your characters, to 
empathize with them. “See the world through 
their eyes, touch it with their hands, smell it with 
their noses…to partner with our storymaker” 
(1996, 5).
The idea of partnering “with your characters” 
is critical to good design. Good design is not 
haphazard, it is not an I-like-it, I-want-it, kind 
of thing. Design narratives, like storytelling, draw 
their structure from (1) the functional practicalities of people’s movement; (2) their social 
norms, or what is deemed acceptable to a people’s 
laws, religions, or collective values; and (3) their 
expressiveness, or what they find aesthetically 
pleasing. Guided by your character’s movement, 
social norms, and aesthetic appreciations, you, as 
designer-author, make, with your narrative characters’ help, decisions as to what messages to communicate. With each decision you begin to limit 
the range of possible spaces, spatial dimensions, 
design elements, and organizational patterns that 
may be used. Rubin refers to this as a combining of constraints (1995, 90–121). The recognition of a design’s message-delivery domains, and 
the selection of a thematic category across those 
domains, immediately helps guide a designer’s 
selection of the first word – whether spatial or 
material – as an entry into the eventual narrative.
This process of becoming familiar with your 
users is helped by Habermas’s Domains of 
Knowledge (1979). Considering the domains 
below helps us understand if we are being honest 
in how we are expressing our design thinking. I 
can’t talk about the social implications of landscapes if I use the language and thinking of technology. Using the language of geometry does not 
allow me to express landscape users’ sensations 
and appreciations. Understanding the Knowledge 
Realm in which you are working makes the interpretation of landscape narrative into a storyboard 
easier.
When I first became familiar with Habermas’s 
Domains of Knowledge, the triad that brought me 
the most clarity was The World – Our World – My 
182
World. Do take time to go through the 12 triads 
below. It is worth your time, energy, and discussions that emerge.
A PERSONAL EVOLUTION
The Dutch [paintings’] scenes 
require a gradual and complete 
reading; we must begin at one 
edge and finish at the other, 
audit the painting like an 
accountant, not forgetting 
this corner, that margin, 
that background in which is 
inscribed yet another perfectly 
rendered object adding its unit 
to this patient weighing of 
property or of merchandise.
(Barthes, 1982, 67)
Harry Porter’s question to me back at the 
University of Virginia years ago of how The 
Analogy could be applied to design stayed with 
me for years. Looking back, I came to realize 
that as I continued working to answer his question I became more and more aware of the social, 
cultural, and personal meanings and values that 
are simultaneously overlaid and embedded in all 
environments’ physical features. What I came to 
understand as a landscape’s potential to communicate messages, to simultaneously build and bind 
places and people, took on a dynamic, interactive character. I began to question the structural 
dynamics influencing the selection and organization of the objects to be included in my designs –  
a process that had previously remained unquestioned, unexplored, subtly unconscious. In my 
search to find what would define the act of “doing” 
design, I found guidance in writings on narrative form and analysis of film (Chatman, 1980), 
poetry (Conron, 1974), and painting (Novack, 
1980). My eventual introduction to communication theory (Giddens, 1984; Habermas, 1979; 
1981) and critical theory (Habermas, 1970) 
squarely set my interpretation of designed products into their socio-cultural contexts. Whether 
landscape or architectural, personal, or cultural, 
space is a social product (Lefebvre, 1976; 1979; 
1994). Understanding the built environment 
as a social product was the first of a number of 
my realizations of the daily interplay between 
people and their physical surroundings and the 
languages and abstractions designers use to record 
and recreate those same surroundings. Lefebvre’s 
statement that space is a social product finally 
allowed me to comprehend John Simonds’ realization that as designers, we “plan experiences. The 
places, spaces, and things take their form from the 
Technology
Society 
Expression
Objective              
Normative             
Subjective
Fact                       
Consensus             
Experiential
The World             
Our World            
My World
Theory                  
Practicality            
Self in culture
Technical Interests
Practical Interests     
Natural Interests
Technical Discourse
Practical Discourse   
Expressive Discourse
Worldತasತitತis        
Institutions            
Reflectiveತself
Physical World      
Social World         
Inner World
Valueತless              
General Values     
Essential Values
Instrumental Action
Communicative Action  
Evaluative Action
Science/Technical       
Legal/Moral                   
Aesthetics/Expression
Means of Production   
Ends                
Selfತreflection
Figure 7.12 Three domains of knowledge.
183
planned experience” (Simonds, 1961, 225). The 
structure embedded in the idea that as designers 
we author experiential narratives was becoming 
clearer in my mind.
For a start, as the authors of designed narratives 
we design in two realms. Those realms both deal 
with the transmission of information, but one 
does so through the expression of the landscape 
narrative, while the other does so through the 
manifest form of that which is being expressed. 
Chatman (1980, 23) recognizes this distinction 
as story (the message(s) being expressed) and discourse (the things expressing the messages). This 
distinction is echoed by Conron respectively as 
tenor and vehicle (Conron, 1974, 3). Another 
distinction is between what the designer/author 
intends and what the user/reader interprets, or as 
you read earlier, the closing of the gap between 
what is sent (authored) and what is received 
(read).
On one hand, those new to design tend to 
­“willy-nilly” claim they know what a design 
should include and with that belief seemingly 
gather together what they consider as necessary 
landscape features. Not that they don’t argue 
(vehemently) for their design decisions; they do. 
All too often each decision is grounded in its own 
immediate and unique circumstances thereby 
bringing a discontinuity across the array of parts 
making up the whole. On the other hand, writing 
a first- or second-person narrative depicting an 
individual or group’s experiences in and around 
a design brings an inescapable continuity to the 
landscape features and spaces. By continuity I 
mean a smooth flow in your narrative character’s 
experiences as he moves toward, into, and through 
your design. Unless your character is in an episode 
of Star Trek he won’t be beaming in and out of 
disconnected settings. To a great extent, writing a 
narrative brings with it a high degree of continuity, which is reinforced with follow-up discussions 
with those you asked to critique your narrative.
The act of narrating a story or stories that 
run throughout a design brings a high degree 
of continuity to the design process and to the 
resulting designed spaces and spatial definers. 
A well-­authored landscape narrative provides a 
logical progression of experiences that direct the 
selection and location of objects you will apply to 
the creation of spaces.
“Narrate” is from the Latin 
narrare (“to tell”) which is 
akin to the Latin gnarus 
(“knowing,” “acquainted 
with,” “expert in”) both 
derivative from the IndoEuropean root gna (“to 
know”) whence the vast family 
of words deriving from the 
Latin cognoscere, including 
“cognition” itself…whence 
the Modern English “know.” 
Narrative is, it would seem, 
rather an appropriate term 
for a reflexive activity which 
seeks to “know” …antecedent 
events and the meaning of those 
events. Drama [is derived] 
from the Greek dran (“to ado 
or act”); hence narrative is 
knowledge (and/or gnosis) 
emerging from action, that is, 
experiential knowledge.
(Turner, 1980, 167)
In developing that continuity through the selection of things that constitute a designed landscape, structure, or interior there are five thematic 
categories that may be used to both analyze an 
existing site and synthesize a new site. Four of the 
ways to interpret inhabited space are derived from 
a course on American Landscapes taught by John 
Conron in 1985 at Clark University in Worcester, 
Massachusetts. They include the categories of (1) 
184
function, (2) history, (3) style, and (4) symbolism. The fifth category is what I call the affective 
or emotional. Used to guide the application of 
narrative in landscape design, in conjunction 
with a unifying viewpoint (the user or users’ 
expectations), these thematic categories provide 
design decisions with a coherence, a harmony in 
the developing message content of an interior, 
architectural, or landscape architectural design. 
While these ways of interpreting landscapes 
worked for Professor Conron (1974; 2000) and 
Meinig’s “Ten Versions of the Same Scene” (1979) 
worked for him, my three categories of narrative 
­expression – function, social/cultural, and archetypical – situated under the umbrella of emotion 
work for me. It would be worthwhile to review 
those works and decide what categories or combination of categories work best for you.
Narrative always says less than 
it knows, but it often makes 
known more than it says.
(Genette, 1980, 198)
While both the story (the message(s) being 
expressed) and the discourse (the things expressing the message(s)) communicate meaning, the 
information expressed through the meaningful 
objects (discourse) is the more explicit of the 
two. The selection, organization, and detailing of 
objects, and the spaces they define and populate 
are read as explicit expressions of what can and 
cannot be carried out as an activity. A curb with 
a six-foot radius displays the arc bicyclists, rollerbladers, motorcyclists, and automobile drivers 
have to work with and at what speeds they can 
and cannot make a turn. We read function, and 
immediately determine whether we can execute 
the intended behavior/skill we need or want to. 
Although I admit young kids can play pick-up 
games of street hockey or stickball just about anywhere, there are still limits to the minimal space 
and shape of space needed for a descent game.
Three similarly shaped and dimensioned walkways may allow the same number of people to 
use each one. But, comprised of different materials each walkway expresses not only its use but 
also its social character and cultural setting. Is it 
a casual walkway, a thoughtful artsy walkway, or 
a highly efficient military walkway? Parking lots 
and parking experiences are part of funerals, carnivals, government centers, grocery stores, universities, and more. Each supports the mechanics of 
driving and parking while calling for its socially 
appropriate behavior on the part of the participants. One may say “prepare to have fun” another 
may say “respect those who came before you.” 
With this in mind, the communication of explicit 
functional messages is dealt with shortly, followed 
with a look into the deeper meanings conveyed 
through a narrative, the meanings that evolve 
through the experiences one has in a place as 
reflected against a blend of their cultural, familial, 
and personal heritages.
Before each topic is explored, the delivery of 
both explicit and implicit meanings through a 
landscape narrative is approached in two ways. 
First, the messages’ clarity, as determined by the 
designer-as-author, is considered with regard to 
the public’s health, safety, and welfare. Second, 
the role of the design user-as-reader is considered. 
Both means of understanding a potential design’s 
appropriateness, or fit, recognize that a landscape, 
a building or buildings, and interior spaces introduce a relationship that binds the designer not 
just with the client but more importantly with 
the design’s users. The relationship is seen as the 
production, transmission, and receipt of readable 
messages. However, one experiences a narrative, 
he or she responds with an interpretation: “they 
cannot avoid participating in the transaction” 
(Chatman, 1980, 28). People come to designed 
spaces, for that matter any spaces, for a reason. 
First, and foremost, that reason is to use the space 
in a particular way for particular reasons, to be 
given direction in how to use it, and to feel comfortable and safe while using it.
That particularly interactive, interpretative 
process of the user-readers gains clarity with the 
help of an understanding of oral history (Rubin, 
1995) and the narrative structure employed in 
fiction and film (Chatman, 1980; 1990). Bringing 
that understanding of story and discourse into the 
lived-in world of designed products and processes 
is helped even more with Giddens’s structuration 
185
theory (Giddens, 1979; 184) and the analyses of 
spatial readings by such geographers as Duncan 
(1990), Barnes and Duncan (1992), Duncan and 
Ley (1993), and Wood and Beck (1994). These 
are a few authors who recognize that spaces are 
read and that while there may be multiple interpretations there are limits to the interpretations a 
reader may make of a given text. They also recognize that by determining a theme design boundaries are introduced within which their design 
(narrative) decisions are to be made. The act of 
doing design, of dealing with what seems at times 
to be an infinite number of decisions to be made, 
is really not as hopeless as many students believe 
as they exclaim, “I don’t know what to do.” “Oh, 
my God, how can I make all those decisions?” The 
act of doing design is not the wide open anything 
goes world that so many design students believe it 
to be. If a design is to be readable, coherent, and 
cohesive a designers’ creativity must work within 
certain contexts and, as a consequence, within 
certain parameters. Creativity is not a license to 
do whatever we please. In authoring a text, within 
a given theme, what is to be communicated, how 
it is communicated, and the spatial and temporal 
sequences used each gain their organization from 
the “recursive character of social life” (Giddens, 
1979, 41). In other words, contained in the repetitive nature of our daily activities and expectations 
is the determination of what preceded it. This 
understanding is found in Rubin’s (1995) “constraint,”“ Chatman’s (1980) “reading out,”“ and 
Rapoport’s (1982) “cues,” all of which you will 
shortly be asked to use in your development of a 
narrative.
WHOLENESS
Whether met or left unmet, what people anticipate as they move through a landscape, what they 
find, and the experiences they have contribute to a 
sense that a design is whole or complete. Whether 
moving from room to room, building to building, 
or city to city, within the realm of anticipation 
people envision typical types of spaces and spatial 
cues that will make up their destination, and, to 
some extent, those spaces they encounter along 
the route to their destination. How do you “know 
the way” or know when you’ve arrived? People 
anticipate particular landscape, architectural, 
and interior spaces that comprise their approach, 
arrival, entry into, progression through, and exit 
from a medical center, a university campus, or 
an urban or natural park. If we don’t find the 
anticipated signs and signals, if the expected messages are not there to be read, we often feel lost, 
or at least disoriented, or find ourselves walking 
toward a building’s loading dock rather than its 
main entrance. Yes, the GPS on our phone can 
get us there. But I’m sure most of us have looked 
up from the phone’s screen to where we are and 
thought, “This can’t be right.” The surroundings 
are what we expected.
Within our landscape narrative experiences, 
movement through spaces, reading of a design’s 
features and organization of the features that 
make up institutional, personal, and wilderness 
places are not easily interchanged. Their relevance to a particular place or activity setting is an 
aspect of their wholeness. To substitute the narrative features read as an approach to and arrival at 
an Atlantic City, New Jersey or a Reno, Nevada 
casino for those of a medical center or church 
would likely confuse a lot of people. While the 
spirituality of hallowed grounds may include the 
same tree and shrub species and paving materials 
as a complex of government offices, their narrative organization would be quite different. Their 
composition as related to the story to be told and 
the context in which it is being told is the heart of 
the recursive character of social life, that what we 
expect to be able to read (identify and find meaning 
in) is determined by what has come before. We 
know what we know, and anticipate what we 
anticipate, because of our past experiences. Our 
daily routines, our repeated experiences, refine 
both our understanding of a place and our expectations of related or seemingly similar places (even 
in foreign countries). Fulfilling our expectations 
as we move about new places can give rise to 
comfortable encounters with those new places. 
Driving the suburban neighborhoods of Montreal 
is unnerving until you come to expect stop signs 
located in the middle of a residential block. Even 
though the red octagon sign is out of place, for 
many first-time visitors, their learned reading of 
186
the shape’s message from previous experiences, 
and the deeper symbolic meaning of authority 
related to the object, gives rise to quick glances in 
the rearview mirror as you drive through the first 
few mid-block stop signs you encounter. Yes, I am 
speaking from experience.
The delivery of information, in a storytelling form, provides a designer with an opportunity to orchestrate or choreograph narratives on 
three levels. It is quite helpful, prior to writing a 
landscape narrative, to include the following in 
your research: functional program, sense of place, 
and social attitudes and values. Most would say 
design starts with an outline or definition of the 
design problem. Typically, the listing of a client’s wishes and the site’s needs is referred to as 
the Program. For an excellent overview of what 
makes up a design program, see Lynch (1971, 
28–31; 260–262). Predominantly quantitative, 
the program notes the required needs to be fulfilled by a design. In doing so, it introduces the 
first domain of constraints along with the first of 
the three primary structural domains of narrative. The domain of functional narrative notes the 
human and mechanical functions, and the quantities of people and things, to be accommodated 
by a design. Determining things like numbers of 
vehicles and their sizes, turning radius, number 
of people, tables and chairs or benches needed to 
accommodate the activities for which a design is 
being done brings with them certain constraints. 
Qualitative aspects like the character of the movement (fast, slow, smooth, broken; comfortable; 
exciting), the nature of the gathering spaces (business group, intimate, solo), and the personality of 
the place (introverted, extroverted) also introduce 
constraints to the size, openness, shape, orientation, and sequencing of spaces. These aspects 
begin to introduce a palette of materials and finishes from which detailed design decisions are 
made later in the design process. For now, they set 
the foundation on which your narrative’s character will move about their sequence of anticipated 
experiences.
The second structural domain, the place-­
making aspects of social norms, deals with the 
communication of socially accepted, and socially 
appropriate, messages. This and the third structural domain, that of deeply held collective 
beliefs, is dealt with below. Consider adding a new 
dimension to your program, one that includes the 
users’ anticipated experiences and their sequencing. Again, this will help you when you let your 
narrative’s characters lose to enjoy the design.
In the course of your lifetime as a designer you 
may work to provide for two or more design programs that are the same. It wouldn’t be unusual 
for two elementary schools, in two different parts 
of the country, to have the same requirements 
for interior and exterior activities, and the same 
functional requirements for teaching, administrative organization and oversight, and recreational 
activities, to say nothing of natural and artificial 
lighting. Yet, set in a New England town, the 
resulting design would (I hope) appear materially 
different from one located in Taos, New Mexico 
or Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan. The domain of 
social norms, what is considered, accepted, and 
promoted by local residents as standard or typical 
spatial character, overlays the functional domain 
with another set of constraints.
In that space is a social product, a volumetric product defined by people’s bodies in motion, 
those constraints primarily give shape, form, and 
character to the functional activity areas in your 
design. How do educators approach teaching 
and learning? How many students, at what level, 
are to be accommodated at one time? What are 
the parents’ attitudes toward classroom learning? 
What would the kids like to experience? What 
style of education is promoted by the State Board 
of Education? What is legally permitted regarding 
science, health, recreation, and social events? These 
constraints again introduce both observable and 
measurable criteria that would influence spatial 
organization. And finally, the way in which the 
residents of a design express their sense of identity 
overlays a third domain of constraints. Knowing 
how teachers wish to adorn their rooms, express 
their character, or how clients typically relate to 
organized clutter or extreme neatness also influences a design’s spatial and material narrative. The 
ways people personally and collectively express 
themselves call into play the finishing touches 
to the building’s original structural organization. 
What kinds of spaces prepare one for a chemistry 
187
class, social studies, math, or physics? And what 
kinds of experiences leading up to particular parts 
of the building or surrounding landscape would 
prepare students to be learners?
Identifying the likely social groups that will 
experience your design is important to preparing 
your narrative to be authentic, true to the users. 
Willis argues that 
the particular meaning and 
scope of the role of institutions 
in the reproduction [of 
social attitudes and values] 
may be less to do with their 
formal nature and manifest 
communications than with the 
unintended and often unseen 
results of their relationships 
and habituated patterns of 
interaction.
(1977, 176)
This view is reinforced by Sieber’s recognition 
that “informal processes contribute to the pupils’ 
learning of formal social behavior” (1979, 274). 
Sieber’s study shows how many of us experienced 
early education as both explicit/formal and the 
more subtle and informal learnings. While Sieber 
focuses on kids’ socialization through informal 
interactions with teachers and parents, N. B. 
Johnson (1982) argues for how the spatial character of preschool to sixth grade classrooms acts 
as a “hidden curriculum” socializing kids to socio-­
cultural norms.
Think back to how your early learning environments (preschool) went from pretty much 
unstructured space, with seats around the perimeter of the room, to kindergarten to first grade’s 
partially unstructured spaces with a few chairs/
desks facing “the front” (teacher’s area and blackboard), to no unstructured space and chairs and 
desks aligned and “facing forward.” Recognizing 
the differences between what is taught and what is 
learned necessitates giving attention to the communicative dynamics of the educational arena – 
the informal aspects of formal education. You 
face front toward the authority. You tend not to 
answer questions unless you know the answer. 
Speculation and creativity are not rewarded. 
I always enjoy the story of a friend and his cat. 
Every time the cat would scratch, or worse climb, 
the living room drapes my friend would put the 
cat outside. One day I asked, “Have you ever considered that maybe when your cat wants to go 
outside it scratches the curtains?” And we think 
we train them.
An excellent example of how the three 
realms – physical sciences, social sciences, arts 
and ­expression – of message delivery structure 
our “doing design” is found in landscape architects’ rainfall runoff calculations. Consider the 
interplay of the three areas of knowledge in the 
application of Manning’s formulas to a drainage 
problem. Scientific data, derived from hydrology, 
soil mechanics, botany, and climatology, provide 
ecologically sound solutions for the removal of 
surface water. Manning’s formulas are universal; 
they can be successfully applied anywhere on the 
surface of the earth. The result of their application 
is a technically adequate drainage swale that safely 
collects and removes specified amounts of surface 
water. The application of a technically efficient 
drainage swale to a cornfield in Iowa, the grounds 
of a French chateau, or a Hopi community introduces design concerns outside the mathematical 
formulas’ capabilities. Once technically correct, 
the swale is then required to satisfy the second 
domain’s criteria of social appropriateness. Social 
context introduces an array of norms associated 
with local politics, attitudes, and special interests 
to be recognized in the design: the appropriateness of the swale’s location, course, and configuration. Neither Manning’s formulas nor Manning’s 
charts can be used to validate decisions made relative to local social norms, values, and history.
Within people’s everyday lives, the acceptance of a technically adequate, socially acceptable 
drainage swale greatly depends on local residents’ 
subjective expressions or aesthetic appreciations. 
Here Chatman would distinguish between viewpoint and point of view. Local approval of a 
188
swale’s surface materials, crosss—ectional shape, 
edge as it meets existing grade, and rate of transition to adjacent land uses and landscape character 
are expressions of local people’s social or group 
sensitivities. Such appreciations of the immediate 
setting are an experience of the solution’s “character” and “fit.” Although part of a larger flood 
control project, the reworking of Englewood, 
Colorado’s Little Dry Creek provides excellent 
before and after examples of aesthetic expressions of a public land use (Grove, 1990). Other 
examples are found in Brian Howard’s National 
Geographic article “Buried Streams See the Light 
of Day” (2014) and Pinkham’s “Daylighting: new 
life for buried streams” (2000).
Nearly a hundred years ago a 
stream was covered over and 
diverted into an underground 
culvert in Northwest 
Washington, D.C. Now 
environmentalists are taking 
steps to restore the stream to a 
more natural flow and revive 
the native flora and fauna.
(https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=0cpl4Oii95U, 
last viewed March 2022)
A further narrowing of the boundaries within 
which a design’s decisions are made occurs with 
the introduction of a theme or themes for a 
design. Themes may express period, place, or 
style: Colonial Pennsylvania, modern Dallas, 
Texas, Arcadian, Nova Scotia. Each has historical 
precedents that may be drawn on and replicated 
with some ease through the retention of a place’s 
historical character. This approach, the identification and implementation of a place’s local architectural and landscape character, contributed 
to what is referred to as “Performance Zoning” 
(Kendig, 1980). Another set of themes introduces the affective or emotional experiences of 
joy, contemplation, strictly business, and the like. 
These again have some standards, but typically 
require the designer to be alert to the character of 
the clients’ current environment, how he or she 
expresses ideas, how they move about, and what 
their resultant spaces look like. There will likely be 
differences in density of plantings and the plants’ 
visual permeability for a happy extrovert versus a 
happy introvert.
A designer’s ability to identify the constraints 
introduced within each of the domains of knowledge, and the thematic realms, reflects on the 
breadth, depth, and character of the designer’s 
formal and informal education. A working knowledge of the sciences, both physical and social, and 
an understanding of the arts as a communicative 
medium make for a wonderful foundation. At this 
crossroad is the heart of the design professions’ 
frequent claims to being “the art and science of 
design.” This, however, is a whole other debate, 
one best taken on by educators in conjunction 
with practitioners, and, I would suggest, futurists. 
A starting point is the Carnegie Foundation study, 
“Building Community” (Boyer and Mitgang, 
1996). Additional fundamental information is 
found in the works of Forester (1989; 1985), Cuff 
(1991), Baum (1983), and Scarfo (1989).
RELATING NARRATIVE 
STRUCTURE TO THE DESIGN 
PROCESS
Authoring a narrative across a landscape, determining the objects, spaces, colors, and so on from 
within the rubric of what users expect to find 
contributes to a design’s wholeness. When people 
meet they share stories. I’ve asked hundreds of 
newly arrived freshmen at different universities 
how they got to know each other during their first 
days together. They quickly conclude that storytelling was the major medium. They recognized: 
how they expressed their individual personalities 
through shared personal stories; how they discovered commonalties among themselves; and how 
they used the stories they heard as a means to 
select the people with whom they would be most 
comfortable being around.
189
When we initiate the telling of one (personal) story over another our selection immediately brings into play a palette (or family) of 
words to choose from, displayed facial expressions, and body language. Taken individually 
and out of the context of the story being told, 
the facial expressions and behaviors may appear 
to be those of someone experiencing a seizure or 
epileptic fit. Try watching America’s Got Talent 
or The Voice with the sound muted. But, organized through the overlay of the story the person 
is telling, their body language, facial expressions, 
and more become coherent and meaningful. In a 
like manner, a story told in a neutral tone without 
facial expressions or audio inflections would seem 
odd and difficult to understand. This interplay or 
orchestration of multiple senses is equally important to the authoring and reading of a landscape 
narrative.
Difficult as it may be to imagine design is a 
narrowing process. Taken as just so many dimensioned and measured individual items in the 
­thousand-plus pages of Architectural Graphic 
Standard (AGS), the construction details and 
design specifications acquire a coherence when 
filtered through a design’s identified program of 
needs. The particularity of the activities selected for 
a site design not only introduces a helpful narrowing of constraints, a limiting of the landscape features to be included in the design, but also brings 
with a continuity to the organization of things 
selected for inclusion in the design. In turn, the 
locations, sequences, and interrelationships give 
the organization of the details a coherency across 
space and through time. As a landscape narrative 
is “written” for a majestic overview, a forecourt to a 
photographer’s studio, or an entryway to a historic 
district, the story being “written” acts to filter the 
multitude of diagrams found in AGS down to a 
particular few. The same filtering process occurs as 
we move our design ideas from concept diagram 
through a schematic to a final plan.
Without the guidance provided by imagining 
a design’s participants and writing a narrative of 
their behaviors and experiences many design students take the wrong fork in the road. Too many 
students design by selecting objects because “they 
look good” and then argue for their goodness 
based upon poorly informed opinions. Even the 
design of a parking lot can often be heard to be 
argued from the position of “I liked,” and “I 
wanted,” and punctuated with the dimensions 
for a parking stall and the turning radius of a 
car. Designers’ faulty reliance on technological 
and geometrical reasoning in their substantiation of a design for people is echoed by Baum 
(1983, 89–90,127–130), Forester (1985, 206–
220), Cuff (1991, 44–45, 66), and Scarfo (1989, 
176–182).
What architects want us to 
hear about design practice often 
tells us more about beliefs and 
ideals than about the principles 
that guide action, or theoriesin-use.
(Cuff, 1991, 20)
 …school [design] problems 
and those of practice…The 
school disembodies the primary 
professional activity of design 
from its context.
(Cuff, 1991, 66)
One approach to taking the correct fork in the 
road comes with young designers becoming part 
of their design through their narrative’s characters’ thoughts and actions, and becoming a 
participant in their design as a walker, bicyclist, 
driver, or passenger. Then, after writing that first- 
or ­second-person experiential narrative, the technical criteria and dimensioned layout of chosen 
construction details can be organized into a coherent progression appropriate to its setting. Please 
reread the previous two sentences. Think about it. 
Your design process answers broad, general questions first and later the more specific ones. The 
functions to be accommodated by a design within 
the domain of the activities sought as the users’ 
expectations are where the wholeness of a design 
190
resides. The wholeness of a design’s narrative is 
found in the appropriateness of what is selected 
for inclusion in a design. Given a potential user’s 
perspective through a first-person narrative, 
the selected items are organized and articulated 
to reflect the continuity of a design across and 
through its spaces in a storyboard.
What if all drawing were 
taught as diagramming, 
as merely a sequence of 
increasingly elaborate graphic 
memoranda? …graphic 
communication can be broken 
down into levels parallel to 
the normal design evolution/
communication process: 
conceptual diagramming, pure 
diagramming, generalized 
diagramming, and specific 
diagramming.
(Wester, 1990, 28)
As a side note, help in exercising our visual and 
graphic thinking in the three structural realms and 
selected thematic categories is found in a variety 
of graphic communication and visual thinking 
books. Two approaches to a clearer understanding of how to test and turn original ideas into 
functional diagrams and then into final designs 
are found in Lari Wester’s promotion of diagramming (1990, 28–29), thinking conceptually, and 
Paul Laseau’s use of a graphic language (1980, 
51–63). Wester’s approach helps overcome the 
belief that either you are born with good graphics or you are not. Laseau complements Wester’s 
levels of diagramming by echoing the fundamentals of The Analogy: “the graphic language proposed here has grammatical rules comparable to 
those of verbal language” (Laseau, 1980, 51). In 
being able to graphically express (storyboard) the 
written narrative of a design’s users the potential of authoring the design’s landscape narrative 
comes a step closer to reality. This help in authoring a landscape narrative becomes apparent as you 
reflect your written narrative off your storyboard. 
That back-and-forth process between word narrative and visual narrative makes clear the value of 
being able to express yourself well as a means of 
seeing your design clearly.
TRANSFORMATION AND 
SELF-REGULATION
Two other characteristics of narrative, in addition to wholeness, are found in Piaget’s concepts 
of transformation and self-regulation. They refer 
to aspects of cohesion in narrative. In Piaget’s 
words the “transformations inherent in a structure never lead beyond the system but always 
engender elements that belong to it and preserve 
its laws…” (Chatman, 1980, 21). This means 
that when you decide to vacation in Florida 
during Spring Break you’ll bring a wardrobe and 
accessories for Spring Break in Florida and not 
skiing in Aspen. Yeah, sounds pretty silly. When 
you think about it, it all sounds pretty simple 
too. It is simple. Design, as practiced through 
The Analogy, calls on storytelling which we all 
do every day. Make a decision to vacation in 
Florida. Look in your closet, go through your 
dresser, and select the appropriate attire and 
accessories. Having chosen Florida the content 
of your decisions never leads beyond what your 
Florida trip calls for. The gloves, woolen socks, 
down parka, and thermal undies stay home. 
What you’ve done isn’t much different from 
outlining a design’s story, using it to lead you or 
your character to the contents and character of a 
physical design, and then use those decisions to 
filter the appropriate construction details offered 
in Architectural Graphics Standards or a construction manual. The transformational part is the 
progression from idea to substantive product. 
But again, those are detailed decisions made 
further along the narrative-storyboard-design 
process. When a design’s narrative is laid out and 
is appropriate to a place, its activities, and the 
users’ expectations, the parts of the design’s mes191
sages are most likely transformed into shapes, 
forms, colors, textures, and more that all fit the 
place, provide for a story, provide for a cohesive 
sequence of experiences, and maintain a stability throughout. Users’ expectations are fulfilled. 
There is a sense of wholeness.
Within the idea of traveling to Florida, your 
decision helped you select items appropriate to 
the trip and your stay. The same selection rationale applies to those decisions you’ll make at the 
more aesthetic end of your travel planning: decisions like what is “in” this year on the beaches 
and not “should I dress in my parents’ swimsuits 
and party wear?” A decision to do one thing over 
another directs you to opportunities, and here 
again it is worth remembering Piaget’s thought 
that “the transformations inherent in a structure 
never lead beyond the system but always engender 
elements that belong to [the system] and preserve 
its laws” (Chatman, 1980, 21).
This holistic view has the 
landscape as a system consisting 
of interdependent subsystems. 
Elements of the landscape are 
seen as expressions of, and cues 
for understanding, underlying 
processes…[the meanings of 
which] are to be accrued not 
primarily from elements, but 
from the interrelationship 
of those elements with one 
another, with their behavior 
as systems, and with the 
processes that have created 
them. Landscape as system also 
holds that elements holistically 
express the various systems of 
which they are part.
(Motloch, 1991, 14)
As for preserving the laws of “a system,” first 
determine which system and which laws you will 
work with during your design decision-making 
process. Remember the three realms of knowledge to which we constantly respond: science/
technical, social/normative, and arts/expressive. Each has its own database and employs its 
own related problem-solving methodologies 
(Habermas, 1981, 157–185; Scarfo, 1989a). 
In a sense, each has its own rules of the game. 
The rules are like those that we call etiquette, or 
that Wood and Beck recognize as the codes that 
come into being through our “consciousness of 
what does and does not satisfy [our wish to be 
comfortable]” (1994, 24). As you move beyond 
your narrative to the greater detail found in your 
storyboard, a blend of Maslow’s hierarchy (1970) 
and Manning’s formulas become easier to apply. 
The systems we strive to satisfy, and I argue that 
we read as the primary landscape texts, are related 
to our application of Manning’s formula (Lynch, 
1971, 170–171). First, deal with the basic laws of 
the world. The physics and chemistry of climate, 
topography, and even our sustenance and physical structure set the parameters within which we 
select types (not styles) of footwear, clothing, and 
playthings. With our biological and physiological 
comforts cared for we then deal with and read 
the environment in search of the applicable social 
or normative laws that will ensure our personal 
safety and acceptance: “what’s socially acceptable 
and expected” for this time and place.
…in practice ecologists look 
for a relative homogeneity 
enabling them to characterize 
and understand the ecosystem 
with a reasonable number of 
measurements.
(Forman and Godron, 
1986, 14)
The civil laws of Jacksonville or Daytona Beach, 
Florida (remember when you used to be able to 
park a car and sleep on the beach?) influence both 
192
our selection of accessories and the activity settings in which we will use them (ten people in a 
two-person motel room). But there are also the 
social laws of the pack. We live in peer groups. 
We strive for our peers’ respect while acting out 
our beach front, boardwalk behaviors. We react 
to our peers while testing just how much the 
local residents (versus the merchants) will tolerate during the very lucrative Spring-Break week. 
In the summer of 1993, Ocean City, Maryland 
reacted to the difference between the local residents’ intolerance for loud “noise” and the vacationing students’ craving for loud music. The legal 
response was the introduction of noise ordinances. 
People were arrested and parties broken up when 
the music could be heard more than 50′ outside 
an apartment or house. Seriously, 50′? What self-­
respecting student on Spring Break doesn’t want 
to let the world know what’s contained in his or 
her playlist?
Further along the narrative-storyboard-design 
process, as your decisions call for greater detail, 
you find yourself increasingly clarifying your 
design’s context and contents. A design’s context, 
both physical and social, and the design program 
to which the context gives rise provide the parameters within which we work to transform ideas 
into built products. That transformation, of 
turning our narrative into a storyboard and then a 
landscape design, typically occurs in three stages: 
program, theme, and expression. First, the design 
program’s transformation of ideas into physical 
forms is determined: number of people to be 
accommodated, square footage for each activity 
setting, quantities of materials, and related acceptable costs. Second, the organization of those physical forms is laid out: passive to active, personal 
to public to institutional, and so on. To remain 
in context, to both support and be supported by 
its surroundings, and best ensure a design’s readability, the organization of the parts of a design 
follows the rules, or codes (social norms), associated with the design’s institutional and public 
contexts. Institutional codes organize activities, 
how they are arranged across a site, and their 
defining elements: e.g., approaches to churches, 
entry into them, and movement through them 
as a ceremony (Wood and Beck, 1994). Japanese 
gardens often provide previews of distant destinations upon entry then take them from your view 
so you can remain more focused on the immediate experiences but with the knowledge of where 
you are going. The institutional formats, socially 
derived through the cultural heritage of a place 
and its historical background being designed for, 
are much like the formats associated with particular types of stories: mystery versus romance, 
documentary versus humor. Consider such 
places as Salem, Massachusetts, especially around 
Halloween, Savannah, Georgia’s Historic District, 
Washington, DC’ National Cathedral, or any one 
of hundreds of amusement parks.
I find it easier to think of the system as a 
family of things that come together and work 
together within a given topic. Botanical garden, 
riverside dining, wooded picnic area, or lakeside 
beach, they all have their own particular words, 
paraphernalia, and procedures associated with 
their activities that can’t be interchanged without 
violating their respective system’s wholeness. The 
words, paraphernalia, and procedures are the narratives into which those systems are transformed.
The third structural domain giving form 
to a landscape narrative is that of expression. 
Habermas identifies that domain of knowledge 
and experience with aesthetics and the arts. How 
we come to express our environments draws on 
our personal and our collective idiosyncrasies, our 
tastes. Everyone may wear their hat backward this 
year but which hat to wear, our school’s hat, that 
of a sports team, a favorite bar or association we 
support? How people interpret local ordinances 
and rules, whether in church, school, or work, is 
how they chose to express themselves as individuals within the greater norm. Again, remember, 
there is plenty of latitude for personal and cultural expression within what at first glance seems 
to be a totally restrictive number of constraints. 
This personalizing of social norms, through the 
transformation of physical and social laws into 
desirable behaviors, introduces the aesthetic 
expressiveness of the arts.
As a reminder, you need to do research prior to 
writing a first- or second-person narrative, a story 
of someone or group approaching and experiencing your design. As noted in Chapter 8, Authoring 
193
a Landscape Narrative, all your background work 
will prepare your narrative’s characters to experience your design.
PARTS OF A NARRATIVE
Whether an everyday routine that has you getting 
from point A to point B safely, or entering into a 
more personally moving, meditative or contemplative place, narratives are comprised of and communicated through a blend of form and content. 
The interplay between form and content that gives 
rise to narratives that are cohesive and coherent, 
whether at the purely functional end of the spectrum or the sublimely aesthetic end, rests upon 
the existence of an underlying structure that holds 
together “the elements of storytelling, their combination and articulation” (Chatman, 1980, 15).
Chatman separates storytelling into the following four aspects of narrative and discourse. 
Remember Chatman defines story as the message(s) being expressed and discourse as the things 
expressing the messages (1980, 24). I’m sure you 
can think of at least ten things that say “Enter 
here” or “Don’t enter here, go around.” There may 
be a given message but various ways, appropriate 
to the place, to express it.
An analysis of the narrative structure’s 
ability to communicate meaning is laid out 
in what Chatman calls a “quadripartite array.” 
Understanding the array is helped with Chatman 
explaining how the “Story is the content of the 
narrative expression, while discourse is the form 
of that expression” (1980, 24). Think about it 
this way. You are asked to design an entryway to a 
park or football stadium. Both ask you to express 
“arrival.” How you achieve that in terms of 
content, substance, and form in which substances 
are arranged across an area will vary.
Juggling all this in the production of a landscape narrative is much easier when you think 
about your final design as narrative of an individual or group approaching, arriving at, entering, moving about, and leaving it. In other words, 
you write a first- or second-person narrative. Rae’s 
Movies of the Mind (1996) does an excellent job 
interpreting Chatman into lay terms, common 
 Figure 7.13 The composition of narrative structure (Chatman, 1980, 22-25). As paraphrased  
by the author.
194
speak as it were. Rae (1996) supports my belief 
that wholeness and coherency are natural byproducts of the authoring of a narrative. Think about 
how many times you’ve met someone and started 
telling a story about yourself, one that expresses 
values in which you do or do not believe. Your 
stories have an introduction, middle, and end. 
They are not a disjointed sequence of seemingly 
unrelated thoughts. In much the same way, when 
it comes to writing it, your landscape narrative’s 
character(s) cannot approach, participate in, or 
leave any activity setting without experiencing the 
appropriate objects and spaces and their appropriate sequence, scale, and orientation. Remember 
Piaget’s thought that a character transitioning 
from one location to another can “never lead 
beyond the system but always engender elements 
that belong to it and preserve its laws” (Chatman, 
1980, 21). Telling a story of someone approaching, arriving at, and enjoying a skatepark will, 
with very little effort, “engender” all the features 
making up a skatepark and not a corporate plaza 
or, for that matter, an elementary school playground. This is where your creativity is called into 
play; there are the shapes and spaces that make up 
a skatepark, but their sequencing can make up an 
okay park or a great one. As Rubin (1995) notes, 
the stories making a society’s oral history may be 
told at different times with different characters, in 
different settings, but , let’s say movie or theater of 
the mind, walk-away messages are the same.
Chatman’s diagram of what constitutes narrative structure, the components shown below, 
introduces an approach to bringing narrative 
into the more traditional design process. In this 
way, a design process dominated by a view to the 
production of landscape spaces, their content, 
and spatial sequence becomes a process now 
balanced through the authoring of cohesive and 
coherent designs. This continuity across space 
and time is explored further toward the end of 
this section. For now, the following diagram 
summarizes Chatman’s elements of narrative 
theory (1980, 26).
 Figure 7.14 Elements of narrative theory (Chatman, 1980, 26). Courtesy Cornell University Press.
195
Just for fun, take a few minutes and interpret 
Chatman’s diagram to represent the elements of 
a landscape narrative. Use the above diagram to 
help you better see a narrative’s application to 
design.
PLACE MAKING AS 
NARRATIVE
As a product of social processes, space by necessity is derived from the interaction within and 
between groups of people (Lefebrvre, 1994). 
Remember Habermas’s taken-for-granted rules 
or what he calls “validity claims” (1979) back 
in Chapter 2. His validity claims help us recognize that people are daily formed and informed 
through their interactions with the land and with 
others. While his theory is almost exclusive to the 
social interaction afforded by words and sentences, 
or speech acts, his basic rules of communication 
do inform us, as designers, of four fundamental 
trusts that bind people with the narrative character of most landscape, architectural, and interior 
design spaces. Transposing his four validity claims 
into the realm of designed spaces helps us recognize that the users of our designs to be able to 
comprehend what they encounter. Second, that 
our design is honest in that it doesn’t intentionally 
mislead the users, that is unless the design is one in 
which people expect to be played with. Third, the  
nature of the design is factual. It works with 
the local ecology and meets the program set by  
the designer and agreed upon by the client. And 
last, the design is sincere. This may seem a stretch, 
because when you think about sincerity you recognize that it can only be proven over time. I take 
sincerity in design to mean that a design will have 
a longevity, it will contribute to its own sustainability. It will become a place in people’s hearts and 
minds. It will meet people’s expectations to such 
an extent that their daily routines work with the 
local ecology to sustain the site and the design. 
For this reason, designs are prepared with the 
aim that they work within the natural and social 
dynamics of their location. We won’t play semantic games and call five-acre zoning a resource 
preservation area, 20-acre zoning an agricultural 
preserve, and we won’t lie to ourselves that we can 
create wetlands where none previously existed. 
Or, like Spirn’s Mill Creek, we wouldn’t be, as 
she notes, “illiterate” regarding the creek’s existence and force (1998). Taken together, these four 
trusts require that as designers we know whom 
we are designing for, what resources are most 
available and how they may be utilized, where the 
site is situated in terms of its ecological and social 
contexts, and why anything on the site is to be 
altered. These trusts are easily transposed into the 
ethical responsibilities accepted by environmental designers as noted in Chapter 10, Ethics in 
Landscape Architectural Design.
To those trusts Anthony Giddens’s structuration theory brings a way to interpret language not 
only in terms of space and time but also in terms 
of the planning and design fundamentals of position, locale, and regionalism (Giddens, 1984). 
These geographical concepts, so frequently found 
in designers’ descriptive and prescriptive thinking, are for Giddens also the medium of people’s 
individual and collective memories: the history 
people recount on a daily basis as their heritage. The geography of the places we call garden, 
home, bedroom, and neighborhood that we regularly recreate through our daily routines in turn 
reinforces who we are. As individuals, our daily 
routines sustain our material sense of identity. We 
daily reinforce the location and organizational 
character of those things and spaces in our rooms, 
homes, front, side, and backyards, and workspaces. We daily reinforce our existence as to who 
we are and the culture and subcultures of which 
we are a part. In admitting to the fact that we daily 
recreate the content and character of our personal 
environments we must also recognize that we do 
so in conjunction with others. Thus, we have rush 
hour. Our daily routines are a mesh that includes 
those routines of our companions, peers, grocery 
clerks and postal workers, teachers and administrators, parking attendants, and others. Edward T. 
Hall refers to this mesh of routines as The Dance of 
Life (Hall, 1983). Giddens along with the semiologists (Barthes, 1979; Parsons, 1964) and certain 
of the deconstructionists (Derrida, 1978) provide 
us with a bridge between language and landscapeas-text, designer-as-author, and user-as-reader.
196
Giddens’s critique of functionalism, particularly the predictability of what is to come in 
terms of shape and form, in a written or spoken 
narrative and along routes we travel between 
places speaks to our expectations as we travel 
with intent. He introduces us to a building 
block of The Analogy. Functionalism provides 
the aspects of locale, or points in which transactions occur. To that Giddens introduces our 
routine practices, the aspect of routine as related 
to everyday life. To these “situated practices” he 
speaks to a person’s active involvement in the 
transformation of codes or rules. As he calls it, 
this duality of structure notes that “the structural properties of social systems are both [the] 
medium and [the] outcome of the practices they 
recursively organize. Structure is not ‘external’ 
to individuals: as memory traces…” (Giddens, 
1984, 25) but more internal to who we are as a 
society and a culture.
Recursive actions as speech acts are simultaneously generated from previous actions. As you 
and I talk with each other we are not only listening to each other, we are listening to ourselves 
and adjusting our respective tone of voice, word 
choice, body stance, and manners. Like sailing, 
we tack and trim our way from point A to point 
B, but not necessarily along the course or line 
originally plotted. Our relations are socially structured, sustained in, and reproduced by our actions 
in “situated contexts.” While they may vary from 
time to time they remain contextual. My activities 
at a BBQ pit are not those I carry out at the credit 
union. We’ve all watched the movie scene where 
someone, more often than not an off-duty policeman, walks into a diner and no one is talking, 
they are not paying attention to their meals, to 
their food, no one is counting out change. You 
know there is a bad guy (or woman) nearby and 
the action is about to erupt.
But more fundamentally, we 
mean that, insofar as these 
arrangements emerge from the 
pasts of those living the room, 
the room is a memory of those 
pasts.
(Wood and Beck, 1994, xv)
Wood’s and Beck’s definition of mnemonic, their 
view of a room as containing memory aids, supports Giddens’s idea of situated contexts. A living 
room, or any room for that matter, “is a mnemonic, certainly: it stores in the arrangement of its 
parts (authors’ italics) how, for instance, we will sit 
with each other so that we do not have to figure 
it out every time anew” (Wood and Beck, 1994, 
xv). They identify inanimate objects as having the 
ability to trigger routine behaviors. They recognize situated contexts as transmitting behavioral 
regularities from generation to generation: living 
room, Grandma’s kitchen, bus stop, plaza refreshment stand. An important realization by Wood 
and Beck is that the spatial and sequential spatial 
character of each place is a critical part of what 
they call a mnemonic and Giddens calls a situated context: memory triggers are refined by the 
volumetric spaces defined by the accompanying 
objects, the spaces’ arrangements, and the overall 
character of the spaces and their definers. So, 
when it comes to writing a landscape narrative, 
you will introduce motion on the part of your 
character. Follow-up discussions within yourself 
and with others will add objects of a given spatial 
character, and their placement that will slowly 
refine the bases of your character’s experiences 
and their expectations. Your path or walkway will 
become unique as it becomes, in the storyboard, a 
particular part of a particular place.
I am going to repeat, in a somewhat different manner, points you’ve already read about the 
landscape as text, and as a narrative that expresses 
the character of and activities in an environment. 
I do this first as an important reminder of the 
existence of and foundation for landscape narratives before getting into functional narratives. 
Second, to introduce the connection between 
personal and local texts and those of larger political and historical regions, e.g., the New Englander 
and New England, Cascadian residents in the 
Pacific Northwest or the New Jersey Pine Barons 
197
region, and Western versus Central versus Eastern 
Provincial Canadian peoples and places.
Consider what happens whenever you leave 
your house or apartment in someone else’s care 
while away on vacation. What do you find 
upon your return? In public and professional 
workshops and seminars on design, I’ve asked 
hundreds of people this question. Other than 
comments on the toilet paper being turned “the 
wrong way” and the new smells in the kitchen, 
a phrase commonly heard is that “Things are 
out of place.” People talk about feeling strange, 
their living room isn’t quite comfortable, and it 
lacks a sense of identity, their identity. They are 
not just talking about specific objects, they are 
expressing feelings derived from a reading of an 
environment’s physical attributes or what we typically refer to as basic design elements: line, plane, 
volumetric form, spatial sequence, and texture. 
Shortly after returning home, and finding things 
“out of place,” you bring the objects around your 
house back into place. This act of realigning your 
world, of recreating YOUR spaces, is not unusual, 
it occurs daily. Whether arranging pencils on 
a desktop or sofas and chairs in a living room, 
our routine restructuring (and reaffirming) of our 
environment is the idea of maintenance found in 
both the definition of economics and ecology. For 
me, this is a fundamental basis of sustainability. 
Our daily routines not only maintain but also recreate our sense of identity and in doing so regularly reinforce who we are. Through what we see, 
smell, touch, hear, and taste we sustain aspects of 
ourselves that cannot be seen, and yet are taken 
for granted as they provide for our comforts.
The Greek word oikos, meaning 
house, is the root of both 
“economics” and “ecology.” 
Over time the significance 
shifted from the house itself 
to what it contained: a living 
community, the household. 
Economics, the older of the two 
concepts, concerns the study of 
how the community manages 
its time, labor, and material 
resources in order to maintain 
itself.
(Nash, 1989, 55)
Space is a meaning-full social product. With this 
realization, as I reread my dust-covered undergraduate sociology textbooks, I began, for the first 
time, to see Berger (1963), Berger and Luckmann 
(1967), and Goffman’s (1959; 1963) interpretations of people in terms of the spaces they produced and sustained over time. As I became aware 
of geographers and historian’s respective views of 
space and time, my understanding of the bases 
on which landscape-as-text is written and read 
was further broadened. Heritage as evidenced in 
built and modified environments (farm fields, 
harvested woodlands, realigned waterways) communicates to people their sense of being, belonging, and what they are becoming. People, as active 
agents of change, whether professional producers 
of landscapes or the users, reflect social and cultural values and meanings through the products 
of their activities. Set on the land the products 
of people’s daily lives become what designers, 
architects, and planners call local and regional 
landscape character (Jackson, 1994; Zube & 
Zube, 1977). This collective social production of 
a place’s character, its deeper meanings, and its 
heritage are in a constant state of becoming. The 
protracted climate change debate, the consternation expressed by existing neighbors to a proposed 
new development, and the extended discussions 
and deaths associated with oil interests taking 
natural resources and cultural heritage sites are 
all pronounced states of becoming: as a person, a 
society, and a culture. As a species.
MEANING CONTENT
In speaking of the capacity of language to allow 
us to interpret meanings, as from a dream, and 
integrate those meanings into everyday life, “such 
198
transposition belong, in a sense, to both spheres 
of reality. They are ‘located’ in one reality, but 
‘refer’ to another” (40). The emotional devastation of the Twin Towers on September 11, 2001 
rivals the physical devastation, loss of lives, and 
symbolic trauma.
Burger and Luckmann talk of “semantic fields 
or zones of meaning.” 
Vocabulary, grammar, and 
syntax are geared to the 
organization of these semantic 
fields. Thus language builds 
up classification schemes 
to different objects [and 
relationships] by ‘gender’ (a 
quite different matter from sex, 
of course) or by number; forms 
to make statements of action 
as against statements of being; 
modes of indicating degrees of 
social intimacy, and so on.
(Burger and Luckmann, 
1967, 41)
Semantic fields are also recognized as related to 
space and the relationships that bring into being 
and sustain those spaces. Mention your vegetable 
garden. Immediately there are practical questions and personal questions about what you 
are growing, how you prepare the soil, what you 
will make with your harvested vegetables, and 
how good you are at growing things. A red, ripe 
tomato embodies so much more meaning than 
the salad it will become a part of: sensitivity to 
nature, learning about one’s self, providing for 
family, self-sufficiency.
Semantic fields, or our social stocks of knowledge, are that accumulated knowledge that we 
build over time and that give order to what we do. 
The objects and spaces that are the semantic fields 
act as triggers, or readable outlines of behaviors in 
the workplace, the home, the street in particular 
parts of town, and the park, that are acceptable, 
somewhat acceptable, and to be spurned. This 
could be considered the realm of not-so-deep 
meanings, those symbolic realms not so far below 
the surface of the pragmatic world, that they are 
still so much a part of our commonsense world. 
This is the realm of accumulated knowledge, what 
is forgotten and what is retained by the individual 
and society. When in a group 
I know that others share at least 
part of this [common-sense] 
knowledge, and they know that 
I know this. My interaction 
with others, in everyday life is, 
therefore, constantly affected 
by our common participation 
in the available social stock of 
knowledge.
(Burger and Luckmann, 
1967, 41)
Regarding driving we refer to the “Rules of the 
Road.” As North Americans, standing in a line 
brings with it a whole set of expectations that are, 
in a sense, thrown out the window when visiting 
many foreign countries.
AUTHORING A LANDSCAPE 
NARRATIVE
Authoring a landscape narrative is a juggling act, 
but a fun one. I hesitate to say that there is a beginning. Saying that sets the stage for us to imagine 
a linear process. Writing a landscape, architectural, or interior narrative is not a linear process. 
Deciding what is to be expressed, and read, is an 
admixture, a blending of the reading and writing 
skills associated with storytelling and the design 
process. The narrative process simultaneously 
gives substance to and takes guidance from the 
design process. While the design process, with 
199
which we are most familiar, is typically driven by 
a quantitative program, and the measurable criteria associated with amounts, areas, and rates, 
the narrative process is driven by a more ambiguous, subjective program of theme, messages and 
message sequencing, meanings to be expressed, 
and remembrances. Blending the object world 
with the type and character of social and personal 
messages to be expressed is found in the process of 
production and expression that makes Giddens’s 
structuration process (Giddens, 1984).
TYPICAL DESIGN PROCESS
A sampling of design processes provides us with 
an outline of a typical design process. Even during 
the 1960s, when design was more of a check-list 
exercise – do I have one of these, four of those, 
did I do this or that – we were still instructed to 
go through a generic problem-solving process of 
problem definition, inventory, analysis, ideation, 
synthesis, evaluation, and final production. This 
process readily tends to impose a design on a site, 
and subsequently on the users. Since then our 
awareness of  ecology, such concepts as dynamic 
equilibrium, restoration, and natural systems have 
introduced design processes that are more fluid 
and context driven than earlier processes. Today’s 
designs tend to be more responsive to their settings, their uses and users, and their future. 
Today, designers and educators talk of the typical 
design process as arising out of the site and the 
users’ history and their needs. They talk about it; 
however, my experiences with senior landscape 
architectural, architectural, and interior design 
students indicate we haven’t come very far since 
the check-list approach to design.
When design students are asked to describe 
the process they are going through with a particular design project – fire interpretation center, 
motorcycle showroom and repair shop, wetlands 
restoration, low-income housing, refurbished elementary school, neighborhood park – they regurgitate the answer: “first I define the problem, then 
I do the inventory.” And onward they go. Rarely, 
very rarely, does a student express their design 
process steps or phases in terms of the specifics of 
the project on which they are working. Rarely have 
I heard students express their project in terms of 
its physical and social contexts: location, orientation, and client and user character. Rarely does the 
student express an understanding (let alone a comprehension) of the inventory of their structure or 
site within the context of their project.
Figure 7.15 Design Process Sampler. Prepared by author.
200
A semester and a half into his project, the 
redesign of a neighborhood park under the rubric 
of crime prevention through environmental 
design (CPTED), a senior landscape architecture student could only express his inventory in 
the most generic terms. The terms were from the 
design textbook: solar orientation, precipitation, 
vegetation, topo, views into and out of the site, 
and so on. That’s fine, but what value are each 
of these typical site inventory categories when 
applied to crime prevention, to a person feeling 
safe and secure in the park? What I heard him and 
so many other students express as their inventory 
(analysis, or whatever) was so generic that it could 
be taken and pinned up with any other of their 
classmates’ projects. In fact I did just that. On 
the day our seniors were to present their projects 
I interchanged the sheets displaying their design 
processes and they all fit in their new locations as 
part of completely different projects.
So, the question emerges, is it possible to 
have a design process that contextualizes the 
usual design process questions? Answering that 
question automatically finds a designer replacing 
all the science, technology, and geometry with 
contextual human behavior, regional values, and 
more. Consider a scientific/technical approach 
to an application of CPTED versus a narrative 
of someone apprehensively walking through a 
dimly lit park afraid for their safety. How might 
this latter approach, this shift in your thinking, 
contribute to your first-person narrative, storyboard, and final design?
Specific to crime prevention through environmental design the existing vegetation of a park 
site could be inventoried as to height of shrub 
mass, height at which tree canopies begin above 
the ground, leaf and branching density along a 
transparency-translucent-opaque scale. The criteria could be considered sight lines for safety. 
Could someone hide behind the leaf mass? Tree 
trunk density at eye level changes in elevation as 
enhanced by the presence of existing and, later, 
mature ground cover, shrub and tree growth. 
With an inventory of this nature, one specific 
to CPTED, the designer concerned with public 
safety could conduct an analysis of the park’s vegetation in a manner that identifies the existing 
vegetative assets and liabilities specific to public 
safety and welfare during the day, during the 
night. A generic site inventory would not open 
that door and reflect and inform the design’s 
public safety theme. Thoughts of public safety 
would remain assumptions.
This approach to design, the interpretation of a 
design process into the framework of a particular 
project’s needs, works to the benefit of the designer 
authoring a narrative. First, and foremost, defining the words “problem (or project) statement” in 
terms of the project’s particular experiential goals 
works to introduce the theme of the design to be 
narrated. Second, replacing the ambiguous statements of problem definition, inventory, and so 
on, with the physical, social, and expressiveness 
particular to the project we begin to adopt the 
sensory vocabulary that we will use in our narration. A police officer and a thief should read the 
environment in the same way, as should housing 
authorities and the poor, and bike path designers 
and bicyclists.
NARRATIVE DESIGN 
PROCESS
The introduction of narrative into the design 
process draws our attention away from a tendency 
to focus on and to deal with just the objects in 
our designs. The designer, as story builder, now 
gives attention to those aspects of the designed 
space based in users’ anticipated experiences as 
they call for the spaces’ activities and character. 
The inclusion of particular messages requires us 
as designers to interrelate the immediate, or local, 
settings’ qualities with those of previously experienced spaces. Even when a space is designed to 
provide a dramatic contrast that drama can only 
occur in relation to what came before, whether 
what came before is actually within the site 
boundaries or the surrounding landscape. The 
aspects of cohesion and continuity that link past 
and present also work to have a design’s activities 
and settings reinforced by what follows them. A 
good narrative brings the reader into a future that 
grows out of and reflects back on the present. The 
future, those spaces ahead of you in an environ201
ment, reinforces the present. The objects that fill 
and define space in the past, present, and future 
moments of a designed area are tied together by 
the interrelationships that grow out of a good narrative that makes sense.
When a narrative’s events and activities make 
sense, as part of a larger story, the quality of cohesion in design is inescapable. Narratives are not 
a random gathering of discrete statements; the 
storyline at any point is verified and reinforced 
further along in a design’s narrative or the users 
likely become disoriented. But even in films that 
depend on the disorientation of the viewer, like 
Chinatown, Inception, Gotham, and Bladerunner, 
and such works of fiction as those by Edgar 
Allen Poe, there exist patterns to be discovered. 
Cohesion and continuity still exist in narratives of mystery and intrigue. As the antagonist 
in many films and fictional works is so often 
told, “You don’t know what you’re getting into.” 
Meanwhile we work to find the ties that link the 
parts together, eventually identifying the glue that 
binds the events, activities, and views.
Narrative design is an admixture of a typical 
environmental design process and the authoring of a story. Identifying what constitutes a 
typical design process led me to Kevin Lynch’s 
classic work, Site Planning (1971). The value of 
his work made up portions of landscape architects’ Uniform National Exam (UNE) through 
the 1980s and more recently the Landscape 
Architecture Registration Exam (LARE). For this 
reason I start with a review of pertinent phases of 
what I feel comfortable referring to as the typical 
design process.
While greatly enhancing the design process 
Lynch is aware of the typical process’s shortcoming. More accurately, the shortcomings of the 
designers who applied it. Deep into his description 
of his enhanced process, he notes, “The preceding 
discussion takes it for granted that we know why 
we are manipulating the sensuous form [of our 
environments]. Our recommendations imply the 
reasons, and most designers are content to leave 
them implicit” (1971, 224). He continues, in the 
next paragraph, to say that we need to be “explicit’ 
in what we call for but doesn’t clarify what “the 
more precise statements of these [sensuous] criteria” are. In character with much of the rest of 
Site Planning, those “more precise statements” 
are likely interpreted as related to the design of 
discrete objects, views, and spaces. Again, there 
is a call for a mechanism that brings together the 
parts, the statements, into a cohesive, coherent 
progression of spatial experiences leading to, into, 
and through a site. A narrative approach to design 
development is that mechanism.
Program development is part of “specifying for whom the [yet to be designed] settings 
are intended and how predicted conflicts are 
handled” (29). “Since qualities of the setting are 
now being determined, design has already begun 
when a program is made [including required 
access between features]” (Lynch, 1971, 28). “By 
describing [landscape] units in terms of behavior 
settings, it describes the intended outcome” (28). 
What becomes clear with Lynch’s view of what 
constitutes a program is that he sees it as a blending 
of quantities and qualities. The identified activity 
settings, the circulation routes linking them and 
within them, and the forms they take on are all 
scaled to meet certain numbers of people carrying out particular activities. The activity settings 
are given observable character with regard to their 
materials’ finishes, sense of openness and enclosure, softness and loudness of sounds, and so on.
“The fully developed program will include 
desired character, intensity of use…[it will be] 
rich and detailed, always expressing environment, 
management, and behavior” (29). His wording 
specifies the character of the activity yet remains 
ambiguous. I know this sounds like an oxymoron. I guess it is but it is one that works. At this 
stage of the design process bench seating for two 
is better expressed as intimate seating. A barbecue 
pit is a food preparation area. Words, as do the 
graphics employed early on in the design process, 
deal in concepts. They identify the relationships 
sought in the final design. More detailed questions are left until later in the process, in that way 
the designer minimizes the confusion of simultaneously working to determine the materials and 
finishes along with the general kinds of spaces and 
their contents. Development of a program, even 
a simple one, through discussions with clients 
and users, provides a good start to identifying 
202
your narrative’s theme. As you begin to draft your 
narrative and get into reviewing the connections 
between landscape sentences (the mental images 
seen and experienced through the eyes of a user) 
increasing degrees of detailed design thinking arise.
As for a design’s hierarchical settings (Alexander’s 
larger and smaller patterns), Lynch’s approach to 
preparing a program gives them more definition. 
Informal dining of 4–8 people implies a different 
character to the space than formal dining of 30–40 
people, or 15 foot candles of light on the walking 
surface provide quite a different late-night ambiance than 80–100 foot candles. Taking a primarily quantitative approach early in a design process 
leaves the final character or thematic nature of a 
designed place to chance. To begin with a definition of a place’s theme (your user’s state of mind 
and expectations) provides a palette of potential 
characteristic spaces, patterns of spatial organization, materials and finishes. Identifying activities 
to be included in your design begins to illuminate 
location, orientation, and sequencing requirements across a site (Lynch, 1971, 30). In making 
these decisions you are eliminating a lot of what 
shouldn’t be included in your design.
But the basic measure of value 
[that comes out of a program] 
is the degree to which the 
behavior settings allow people 
to feel competent in doing what 
they want to do and the degree 
to which they favor personal 
development of competence and 
purpose.
(Lynch, 1971, 30)
Realize, as true as the above statement is, it leaves 
implicit and therefore relies on each designer to 
determine just “how” people experience the site so 
as to feel competent doing what they want to do. 
In this approach, there remains a call for a socially 
agreed upon mechanism that accommodates 
people feeling competent. His is a valid approach 
but in stopping short of recognizing that materials, shapes, magnitudes, and more speak to the 
users he seems to assume the designer knows best. 
If this is the case, then designs are imposed upon 
rather than drawn out of those most likely to use 
the site.
The site plan deals in its 
essence with three fundamental 
patterns of location in space 
and time: the patterns of 
activity, the patterns of 
circulation, and the physical 
forms. These are the subject 
matter of the [designer’s] first 
sketches and remain dominant 
themes throughout the work.
(246)
Within The Analogy, the dominant theme 
throughout a work is what the main character(s) is 
experiencing walking along the “patterns of circulation.” Before providing any storyboard sketches, 
the narrative introduces rates and rhythms of 
movement, views and sensual stimulations, all 
colored with the proposed landscape users’ experiences. It makes conscious what so much design 
literature leaves, at best, implied and, at worse, 
unconsidered: that is people, their experiences, 
emotions, and expectations.
The summary Lynch provides of his approach 
to doing a design (1971, 246) seems a bit haphazard in its lack of a theme to unify the decisions 
made each step along the way. He seems to rely on 
the assumed skill and goodness of the designer’s 
sensitivity. In so doing Lynch ignores so much of 
the sensitivity he earlier called for as relying on 
and referenced to contexts. This assumed intuitive 
nature of a designer leaves to chance a continuity 
across the site design. There is a need for a developmental logic between activity settings, something a designer’s day-to-day changing moods are 
not likely to provide. People do not just beam in 
and beam out of points throughout a site. A con203
scious application of a narrative logic to that of 
the setting’s “ecological” logic would strengthen 
the adequacy, appropriateness, and suitability a person would sense throughout the entire 
design-as-narrative text. With those environmental, material qualities noted in your character’s 
movement along his or her circulation route in 
hand the designer-author is then prepared to do 
the sketches that comprise a storyboard.
A designer’s “studies proceed 
in the schizophrenic manner 
common to all design…relaxed 
and uncritical, allowing his 
subconscious mind to suggest 
new forms and conditions…
at other times he looks sharply 
at these suggestions, consciously 
testing them for the way 
in which they apply to his 
purposes…Part of the skill of 
the designer lies in managing 
these two states of mind so 
that his critical powers do not 
inhibit creative suggestion, 
while his irrational processes do 
not prevent adequate analysis.
(Lynch, 1971, 247–248)
Lynch’s thinking, provided above, adds to my 
wish for the exclusion of independent statements 
throughout a design, expressions of messages 
and meanings that are not part of the developing storyline. A developing storyline, a first- or 
second-person narrative, brings with it a coherent 
progression across spaces, views, and activities. 
Given Lynch’s description, the process sounds 
egotistical, leaving the designers with so much 
ambiguous authority. Again, Lynch relies too 
heavily on the assumed goodness of the designer’s abilities which, in turn, rests on education, 
practice in an office, and licensure. How, on what 
basis, does the designer “look sharply” at “new 
forms and connections”? On what basis does 
the designer to whom Lynch refers know “good 
design” when he or she sees it or “test them for 
the way in which they apply to his purposes”? 
“His purposes”? How can we be confident that 
the designer’s purposes echo those of the eventual 
user of the design?
Lynch talks about the design alternating 
between part and whole, part and parts, section 
and plan, elevation and perspective, and “managing” these dual states of mind “so that [the 
designer’s] critical powers do not inhibit creative 
suggestion…” (248). These thoughts are describing skills, leaving us to question what directs the 
selection and organization of content, the affective 
substance of the design, its program. Okay, but 
even though Lynch recognizes what he calls a sensuous program, his process still calls for a designer 
to be able to orchestrate a cohesive continuum of 
messages. One that can be read to others, with 
others, and make perfect sense. Lynch’s approach 
leaves the emergence of a landscape narrative to 
chance whereas The Analogy starts with a narrative. In doing so, the narrative-storyboard-design 
process provides in a more logically progressive 
way much of what Lynch calls for.
I don’t agree with what follows but it is telling 
of what Lynch recognizes: 
The normal program simply 
gives the quantities of space to 
be provided by broad categories 
of standard function…The 
quality of those spaces, the 
behavior expected…and the 
purposes and attitudes of their 
users get little attention.
(260–261)
Lynch does state that much of this shortcoming can be overcome “if a program is properly 
made” (261) and that such a program calls for the 
204
designer beginning “by specifying what actions 
are expected to take place [throughout the final 
site design]” (261). Rather than relying on the 
designer to specify the expected actions, Rae, in 
Movies of the Mind (1996), would say to let your 
character(s) take over. Let them take you into and 
through the emerging design. In their use of the 
site they will help you see so much of what Lynch 
leaves to the designer.
What is important to note is that writing a 
narrative, as a starting point in a design’s development, is only limited by the people for whom 
it is written. The narrative and therefore its storyboard and final design respond to the likely users’ 
expectations. Identifying the users’ expectations is 
something, as designer-author, you come to know 
after interviews and research, and through discussions with others and before you start writing 
your narrative. In writing a landscape narrative 
by empathizing with the likely users’ expectations, experiences, and wishes, you bring a more 
user-friendly approach to the design process than 
Lynch’s designer’s sense of what makes for a good 
design.
Lynch provides parameters of what could be 
interpreted as a landscape narrative but doesn’t 
refer to them as such. He outlines what is needed 
but not how to provide for them. Needless to say, 
the designer-as-author and landscape-as-text metaphors answer the “How” question. In fact, taking 
Lynch’s Site Planning as a whole we could use it to 
guide the design authoring process. Please note: 
the following is located on pages 224–227, only 
in the second edition of Site Planning (1971):
1.	Sensations should be within the range of 
comfort.
2.	An adequate diversity of sensations and environments should be available.
3.	The sensuous environment should support the 
action people want to engage in there.
4.	Places should have a clear perceptual identity: 
recognizable, memorable, vivid, engaging of 
attention, differentiated from other locations.
5.	The identifiable parts should be so arranged 
that a normal observer can relate them to each 
other and can understand their pattern in time 
and space.
6.	The environment should be perceived as meaningful, its visible parts not only related to each 
other in time and space but related to other 
aspects of life: functional activity, social structure, economic and political patterns, human 
values and aspirations, even individual idiosyncrasies and character.
7.	Finally, the environment has a part to play in 
the intellectual, emotional, and physical development of the individual, particularly in childhood, but perhaps also in later years.
Lynch’s seven-step design process can be used 
more as a test of completeness than a guide. By 
that I mean, once you understand your probable 
users and their reasons for coming to your design 
write a first draft of your narrative. Review it. 
Then use Lynch’s seven steps to identify parts of 
your narrative that can be made more complete 
and provide for a smooth flow across the site. In 
applying Lynch’s seven steps to your written narrative, each step is clarified in terms of your narrative’s theme.
The environment is an 
enormous communications 
device – people read it, they 
seek practical information, they 
are curious, they are moved 
by what they see. Congruence 
of the visible and social world 
will facilitate action and 
make both those worlds more 
comprehensible….Formal 
legibility is at least the common 
visible base on which all groups 
can erect their own meaningful 
structures.
(Lynch, 1971, 226)
As grand an idea as this is in support of considering landscape-as-text, Lynch goes on to refer to 
205
the production of discrete statements with the 
assumption they contribute to a cohesive landscape narrative that flows.
What is interesting in Lynch’s design process is 
his laying out of activity areas early in the process, 
his early recognition of the need for a design to 
deal with people’s physiological needs. This is in 
line with Maslow’s hierarchy. The second phase 
of Lynch’s design process, the laying out of circulation, reflects Maslow’s second level of actualization, that people are able to access locations 
where their needs can be satisfied, be it information (wayfinding), physiological (food, shelter, 
exercise), or an appreciation of nature or culture 
(views, aromas, birds or butterflies).
Thus it is that architectural 
genius has been able to 
realize spaces dedicated to 
voluptuousness (the Alhambra 
or Granada), to contemplation 
and wisdom (cloisters), to 
power (castles and chateaux) 
or to heightened perception 
(Japanese gardens)…the 
animating principle of such 
a body…[is] within those 
who use the space in question, 
within their lived experience.
(Lefebvre, 1994, 137)
How circulation routes approach and meet activity areas provides for and reinforces a person’s 
sense of orientation. In working to provide for 
and satisfy people’s basic needs, these first phases 
of the design process call for images that express 
the place’s functional narrative. As a narrative, the 
messages’ flow supports people’s sense of comfort 
in terms of their health, safety, and welfare as participants in and users of the environments they 
traverse. Beyond these needs, as more detail is 
added to a design, that product – through the 
designer’s sensitivities – responds to the locale’s 
social norms and finally people’s expressions 
of self. Again, my experience is that this comes 
about fairly easily with your writing of a first- or 
second-person narrative from your design’s participants’ point of view.
What you’ll find, once you write a narrative 
and begin to refine it, is that the parts making 
up the landscape are increasingly responsive to 
the value-laden meanings held by the inhabitants 
of a place. As the details in a design are refined, 
they increasingly support the users achieving 
self-actualization. Landscape designs are interactive, sustained over time through the ways in 
which the spaces are used. Designs that do not 
allow the users to interact with their form and 
content do not allow people to become self-­
actualized. Consider the times and ways you’ve 
felt put upon or ignored by a landscape setting. 
What did you do? Did you behave in ways that 
sustained the place and its parts? Or, did you 
consciously or unconsciously behave in ways that 
modified the place or its features? Did you cut 
across that lawn? As Lefebvre notes, people who 
are unable to self-actualize by identifying themselves in a setting tend to incite a revolution, or 
at least change the spaces. Given what they find 
in a landscape, people act on refining their personal and collective senses of self and the spaces 
reflect that process of becoming. This can occur 
when a place allows people to “build” or in some 
way realize their own narratives: the selection of 
ancillary routes, various seating types and scales of 
Figure 7.16 Green area by Hirschhorn Museum, 
Washington, DC. Courtesy of James Urban, the 
Office of James Urban, FASLA.
206
related space and elevation, views and suggested 
paths, an orchestration of multiple senses called 
upon, and so on.
I laughed when touring James Urban’s design 
for the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington, D.C. 
with Jim. He pointed to two benches set on a 
small plot of green lawn on the west side of the 
museum. In this highly urban setting, especially 
in the summer heat and humidity of Washington, 
D.C., the bench seats invited you to walk across 
the lawn to get to them and take a break. The twist 
was that museum security staff saw the lawn as 
inviolable and yet would themselves walk across it 
to tell you you couldn’t sit there. Apparently, like 
the time we visited, Jim would on occasion go to 
the museum’s security office and remind them the 
seats were in fact there to be used.
The questions remain, what do we as designers 
narrate? How do we identify and select the story 
to be authored? Where do we find the answers that 
provide us with a sense that the evolving larger 
message is appropriate to the people and the place 
and that it will be identifiable and readable?
The real creativity of an emerging design is the 
designer’s ability to author a narrative that at least 
holds all the critical points together, if not, at least 
holds the users’ attention because the evolving 
story touches them personally. The reward may be 
as simple as getting between two points without 
feeling lost, or as deeply moving as sensing a closeness with the magnificence of technology (I am 
part of this city), spirituality (This place brought 
me closer to God; or the Earth), or self (Here I 
found new meaning in my life).
Identifying deeper meanings is helped through 
a case study provided in the next chapter. In the 
next chapter you are introduced to a project 
that was a collaboration between a sculptor, a 
landscape architect, the Providence Sisters, and 
Sacred Heart Hospital and the Center for Faith 
and Healing staff. The client was Sacred Heart 
Hospital (now Providence Sacred Heart Medical 
Center) in Spokane, Washington. The theme to 
be expressed was “Finding Solace.”
For now, this chapter has dealt with the breadth 
and depth of narrative and landscape-as-narrative. 
It is not all here. There is so much more you can 
explore and, I hope, contribute to the idea and 
application of landscape-as-narrative; for that 
matter, designer-as-author and user-as-reader. 
What you have at this point is a basis for understanding what to look for in your clients and 
what to present to your clients as substantiation 
for your using the narrative-storyboard-design 
approach.
Now that you have a sensitive understanding 
of your client’s wishes, the site to be designed, and 
the likely background of the landscape design’s 
users, we can outline an approach to writing your 
narrative: where it came from; how to get started; 
and ways to perpetuate its opening up to you in 
increasing detail. 
8
Authoring a Landscape 
Narrative
W
riting is a slower, more focused, process 
of self-expression than speaking. I have 
long believed that the process of selecting each word making up a written sentence and 
each sentence making up a paragraph is directly 
related to how well we see our designs’ features, 
details, and contexts. If you can’t express it, then 
you can’t see it. And the “I’ll know it when I see 
it” ploy is just a stalling tactic. This understanding goes hand in hand with how Betty Edwards 
(1999) helps us draw better by learning how to 
focus on and see more clearly what we want to 
draw. Our ability to express ourselves well in 
writing directly relates to how detailed and complete our drawings are.
In preparing to write your narrative, the following chapter introduces you to three writers – 
fiction writer Colleen Mariah Rae, novelist and 
non-fiction writer Anne Lamont, and poet Ted 
Kooser. These are three practical, down-to-earth 
writers whose love of expression, of clarity of 
imagination, helps you prepare to write a landscape narrative, cum storyboard and final design. 
These writers’ thinking is summed up in the 
following three quotes and further unpacked 
throughout the chapter to help you become more 
comfortable with writing.
Rae’s approach to writing is cinematic. She 
allows her characters to live out their lives in her 
mind as she watches and records their experiences 
and emotions. Rae helps us imagine that 
On that ‘screen’ [referred to as 
your mind’s eye] you don’t just 
see and hear as you would with 
a regular movie, you taste and 
touch and smell and slip into 
the bodies of your characters 
and see the world through their 
eyes, touch it with their hands, 
smell it with their noses.
(Rae, 1996, 5)
However, Anne Lamott admits to the difficulties 
that, for many of us, characterize how we think of 
and deal with writing. Yet, she also speaks to how 
to deal with those difficulties and reap the rewards 
that come with perseverance. 
[In the midst of all the 
distractions] you clear a space 
for the writing voice…you 
begin to string words together 
like beads to tell a story. You 
are desperate to communicate, 
to edify or entertain, to 
preserve moments of grace or 
joy or transcendence, to make 
real or imagined events come 
alive. But you cannot will this 
to happen. It is a matter of 
persistence and faith and hard 
work. So you might as well just 
go ahead and get started.
(Lamott, 1994, 7)
And then poet Ted Kooser helps us understand not 
only the critical importance of each word we select 
but also the importance of knowing who you are 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-9
209
210
writing for and also that you are writing (designing) 
for individuals who need to be able to read what 
you’ve written. In filtering his thoughts through The 
Analogy, you begin to recognize your narrative as 
the foundation of an environment in which people 
find their expected activities and fulfill their emotions. As with Kooser’s poetry, your design is a form 
of communication, and for him 
Poetry’s purpose is to reach 
other people and to touch 
their hearts. If a poem [read 
landscape design] doesn’t 
make sense to anybody but its 
author, nobody but the author 
will care a wit about it. That 
doesn’t mean that your poems 
can’t be cryptic, or elusive, or 
ambiguous if that is how you 
want to write, as long as you 
keep in mind that there is 
somebody on the other end of 
the communication.
(Kooser, 2005, xi)
Kooser’s closing comment, above, captures the 
driving force behind the narrative-storyboard-­
design approach to landscape, architectural, 
and interior design. The beauty of the narrative 
approach is that it is almost impossible to not 
“keep in mind that there is somebody on the 
other end of the communication.”
On one hand, describing a design, as is so often 
done, in geometric terms (focal point, ground 
plane, verticals, axis, etc.), budgeting, and efficient scheduling brings with it no responsibility 
to consider people as more than related assumptions. On the other hand, by starting your design 
process through the senses of your site’s potential 
users, as a first- or second-person experiential narrative, you cannot avoid having somebody at the 
other end of your landscape narrative’s communication. Given background research on a site, 
client, and probable users, your design emerges 
as seen through your characters’ eyes, touched 
with their hands, smelled with their noses, heard 
through their ears, and maybe even tasted. Your 
written narrative is almost like a cerebral flythrough, one that leads you into and through 
your design and is so much more than a summary 
of objects and spaces in the completed design.
Fortunately, chronicling 
the movies in the mind is not 
only an easy job, it’s one that is 
great fun. The most magical part 
about writing fiction – the thing 
impossible to understand until 
we experience it – is that stories 
play themselves out on the screen 
in our mind with a volition all 
their own. I’ve literally fallen 
out of my chair laughing at the 
antics of my characters. And 
that’s what’s fun about writing 
fiction – the pure entertainment 
value of watching the movies in 
the mind once we learn to get 
out of our own way and partner 
with our story maker.
(Rae, 1996, 5)
Writing your narrative is where the wonder of 
The Analogy’s designer-as-author, landscape-astext, and user-as-reader design progression pays 
big dividends. As a designer-author you design 
your site through your character’s wishes, anticipations, and expectations. The design materializes as your character progresses from first 
impression, to movement toward the site, into 
it, and through it. Yes, this is a highly subjective approach but not without a foundation in 
normative behaviors. Since we are developing, 
211
to use Lynch’s wording, a sensuous design, then 
doing it through the senses of those who will 
experience it is a great place to start.
I’ll never forget one student’s narrative. The 
design was the revitalization of a neighborhood’s 
historic business district. A family made up of 
mom, dad, their young daughter, and their dog 
were on their way to enjoy a parade and street festival. The interplay between adults, child and dog, 
yes and the dog, as they approached the parade 
was priceless: animal, child, and adult movements, views at different eye levels, each pulled in 
different directions by various sights, sounds, and 
smells. The historic business district’s design was, 
in a sense, coming into view.
As a starting point to your design, writing a first- 
or second-person narrative makes it simple. Your 
design will gain in depth and detail as you progress. 
Even a simple narrative, especially since you are not 
used to doing this, is an important way to introduce yourself to your characters before you let them 
go and allow them to help you get to better know 
your eventual landscape design. Yes, time is critical. 
You’re probably working on a project for school or 
for a client and your likely, to some degree, on the 
clock, facing a deadline. Given what time you have, 
do as much background research as possible before 
you start writing. Start by familiarizing yourself 
with your clients, they know who they wish to 
attract, to entertain or please so they will spread 
the word and come back with friends. When you 
feel your client provided sufficient insight, do some 
good old-fashioned book and article research. If 
you’re lucky enough to be near a university, or a 
public library, use it. Consult the librarian. Often 
there is a “research librarian” on staff and they are 
good at what they do. If you’re not near a library, 
fire up Google, Bing, Yahoo, or whichever search 
engine you find most comfortable.
Don’t confine your research to just the demographics and behaviors of your site’s expected 
users. Get into their heads. Expand your thinking. 
Why will they be coming to your site? Get into 
their emotional state, age-related issues, social 
development, and likely outlook on life. Don’t 
hesitate to call specialists and explain what you’re 
working on. I’ve tracked down specialists (as far as 
Finland and Australia), called or emailed, and discussed questions I had. Remember John Simonds’ 
epiphany, 
The soul stirring secret…lay, 
not in its plan, or its forms, 
or its spaces, but in what one 
experienced there…One plans 
not places, or spaces or things 
– one plans experiences. The 
places, spaces, and things take 
their form from the planned 
experience.
(Simonds, 1961, 225)
Designers often address their potential users, in 
terms of what they will do, where they will do it, 
how they will go about doing it. Rarely do they, 
do we, consider the users’ experiences, let alone 
use those experiences as the lead into a design. 
Hopefully, Kooser’s call to keep in mind that 
someone is receiving your design is beginning 
to dovetail with Simonds’ realization that your 
design participants are the recipients of the experiences your design is going to provide, in a sense, 
what they are asking you to design.
When you are done with background research, 
gestate, ruminate, contemplate – ideate. Let your 
subconscious do its thing for a day or two. Always 
carry a recorder, pencil and pad of paper, or notebook, iPad, or smartphone with you. As ideas 
come to mind regarding your user group and 
their likely sought-after experiences, record their 
points of view.
PREPARING TO WRITE YOUR 
NARRATIVE
The result of this painstaking 
work was that Thoreau gradually 
elucidated most of the dominant 
patterns of seed dispersal and tree 
seedling recruitment within an 
212
afternoon’s walk of his home.
(Nabham, 1993, xv)
What Rae, in Movies of the Mind, calls “the well” I 
referred to over the years as personal experiences. 
I’ve assured many first-semester design students 
that whether they grew up in a metropolitan city 
or a rural village, by the time they came to university they had experienced all they needed to 
become a great designer. Flannery O’Connor does 
me one better. He “said that enough has happened 
to each of us by the time we’re eight years old for 
us to write about it forever” (Kooser, 2005, 74). 
For me, the caveat is that, no matter the age of 
my students, they had to be willing to ask deeply 
self-reflective questions of their personal experiences and be willing to dive equally deeply into 
those experiences, by way of their subconscious, 
to find the answers. Intuition isn’t Shazam magic, 
it is work, but like learning to drive a car or ride a 
bicycle, once you got it down it literally becomes 
second nature and you can call on it when you 
need it. “For each of us the way to the well is different. That’s why every artist must become aware 
of his or her own process and become the mapmaker, naming the terrain so that the way back is 
known” (Rae, 1996, 6).
Rae goes on to say 
I came to see how my writing 
process wasn’t the linear one 
some writers report. I can’t sit 
down and have the story unfold 
under my pen. No, my process, 
I realized, was like that of a 
sculptor who works first in clay. 
I start with an incident that 
has been haunting me, then I 
spend a lot of time scribbling 
in notebooks, digging the clay 
through conversations with my 
characters, through detailing 
up scenes, through trial runs 
with voice and so on…Once I 
get the rough form, I then get 
to do what I like most of all – 
shape the story into its most 
beautiful form.
(6)
Rae sees herself as a guide. Her way of forming 
and refining a narrative may work for you and 
then again may not. Her advice is to let her guide 
you but, in the end, go with what works for you 
and develop your own process. She asks you, in 
some form or other, to leave “tip-of-the-iceberg 
thinking” and immerse yourself in your characters. Let your characters take over and [then] get 
out of their way.
What’s interesting about Rae’s readers of written 
texts and ours of landscape texts is that what she 
works to produce in her readers’ minds, with a 
great deal of success, is what we produce in our 
landscape users-as-readers’ minds. Interpret what 
Rae says here as if she was talking about people 
experiencing a landscape narrative. “Fiction’s 
power comes from the fact that when our readers 
are feeling and tasting and touching and seeing and 
hearing in their mind’s eye, they’re experiencing 
emotions in their bodies” (Rae, 1996, 27).
The 
Analogy’s 
narrative-storyboard-design 
process brings more enjoyment and fun to the 
landscape architectural design process than ever 
seemed present when I was a student learning 
problem definition, inventory, analysis, ideation, 
design, and evaluation. Rae highlights the fun 
aspect of writing, I’d say designing, in a quote from 
Anthony Storr’s Solitude: a return to self (1988).
It seems probable that there 
is always an element of play 
in creative living. When this 
playful element disappears, 
joy goes with it, and so does 
any sense of being able to 
213
innovate. Creative people not 
infrequently experience periods 
of despair in which their ability 
to create anything new seems 
to have deserted them. This is 
often because a particular work 
has become invested with such 
overwhelming importance that 
it is no longer possible to play 
with it.
(Rae, 1996, 9)
Rae talks about images as fiction’s building blocks. 
Given my process, words require focus and selection even when you start by allowing your characters to take over, arrive at, enter into, and move 
about your design. Your interpretation of those 
words into images is a major clarification phase of 
your design process, a process later greatly refined 
by reflecting your written story off your visual 
story: reflecting your written narrative off your 
storyboard.
Rae’s advice applies to our drafting our narrative text. “Be willing to write without censoring 
anything. Just let it come off your pen. You’ll be 
surprised by what surfaces. But don’t let the surprises scare you” (Rae, 1996, 67). There are two 
reasons for not being scared. First, any abnormalities will become apparent as you discuss your 
first- or second-person narrative with others – 
which you will do. Second, those, what you see 
as anomalies in your narrative’s progression, will 
be further illuminated when the narrative text 
emerges as your storyboard and is then discussed 
with others for its relevance to your written text.
And, most important, always 
let your character tell you 
the story. One of the biggest 
mistakes we writers make 
is thinking we have to come 
up with a story. In fact, all 
we have to do is listen to our 
characters. In digging the clay, 
I’ve frequently discovered that 
they often knew better than I 
the best direction for the story 
to go.
(69)
One distinction between us as designer-writers 
and Rae’s writers-as-writers is that most writers’ 
approaches can be “slow unforced development.” 
Many writers can allow their unconscious time 
to roam while designer-authors have clients with 
schedules and budgets. Don’t let this pressure 
dissuade you from allowing your unconscious to 
take 24–36 hours to roam, graze, play, or dream 
during which time is all the more reason to use 
Rae’s exercises, or do what the firm of Zion Breen 
Richardson Associates used to do. When there 
was down-time in the office they would prepare 
designs for settings they had not yet been asked to 
do. Such was the origin of Paley Park in New York 
City. As Bob Zion told my students and I, when 
William Paley asked for a design to memorialize 
his father Samuel Paley, they went to a collection 
of already-completed designs and pulled out what 
became Paley Park, located between Madison and 
Fifth Avenue in New York City.
In her response to a question about her 
“dreaming” about her characters while awake, Rae 
responded, 
Figure 8.1 Paley Park, New York City.  
Photo by author.
214
…if there is any place you 
fall out of the dream, read 
your story aloud. You’ll hear 
the places where [the unity of 
effect is violated] much better 
than you can ever see them….
reading aloud puts a story to 
even more of a test because it 
makes the analytical process 
subordinate to that activist part 
of us that knows a good story 
when it hears one.
(Rae, 1996, 118)
The second writer I’d like to introduce is poet 
Ted Kooser. His book, The Poetry Home Repair 
Manual: practical advice for beginning poets (2005), 
like Rae’s is equally informative for designers 
whether they use the narrative-storyboard-design 
approach, or not.
In response to a note that he got from someone 
who read one of his poems and said that from 
that day on she’d see a part of her world in a wonderfully different way, Kooser responded, “I’d 
given her something that changed the way she 
saw the world, and she was thankful for that” (7). 
Imagine, one day someone saying that about one 
of your designs.
When something happens to 
catch your attention, and you 
feel like making a note of it, 
you can usually trust your 
impulse. There may well be 
something there worth writing 
about. Chances are good that 
you’ve noticed whatever it is 
because somewhere within 
you, you have a glimmer of 
feeling about it. At first you 
may not recognize or be able to 
elucidate that emotion, but as 
you work with your words the 
feelings can be expected to come 
forward.
(14)
This is one way to feed your intuition. Record 
your experiences, good and bad. Consider the 
setting, what senses were reaching out, and what 
they were bringing back to you? Experience it all.
Think about the following in terms of developing a design. 
After you’ve written your first 
drafts, you begin to revise, 
making critical judgments 
about what you’ve written, 
decisions made in part upon 
which word goes best in 
which position, about the 
appropriateness of a figure 
of speech, about the use of 
grammar and punctuation, 
and about how your writing 
may affect an imagined 
reader. Revision, and I mean 
extensive revision, is the key 
to transforming a mediocre 
poem into a work that 
can touch and even alter a 
reader’s heart.
(16)
With a bit of humor, Kooser notes the commitment to revising one’s writing with, “Much has 
been written about revision, but I always liked 
215
this passage from Edward Week’s book This Trade 
of Writing:”
A. Edward Newton tells a 
story of Oscar Wilde at an 
English house party. Pleading 
the necessity of working while 
the humor was on, he begged 
to be excused from joining the 
other guests. In the evening his 
hostess asked him what he’d 
accomplished, ‘This morning,’ 
he said, ‘I put a comma in 
one of my poems.’ Surprised, 
the lady inquired whether the 
afternoon’s work had been 
equally exhausting. ‘Yes,’ said 
Wilde, passing his hand wearily 
over his brow, ‘this afternoon I 
took it out again’
(16)
Though [Edward] Weeks 
says revision is drudgery, I 
don’t agree. You can learn to 
love tinkering with drafts of 
poems till a warm hand from 
somewhere above you reaches 
down, unscrews the top of your 
head, and drops in a solution 
that blows your ears off.
(17)
In a slightly varied way, Kooser recommends 
that when you sit down to 
write you have in mind an 
imaginary reader, some person 
you’d like to reach with your 
words…The more real your 
imaginary reader seems to you, 
the easier it becomes to shape a 
poem that might reach through 
to that person.
(20)
In your case as a designer-author your “reader” is 
a little more real.
Two exercises my students actually came to 
enjoy involved their writing poems and haikus 
as a means of getting “inside” the experiences a 
person may have in their design – or, as in some 
instances, their design experiencing a person. I 
like J. J. Gibson’s strategy “to regard the senses as 
aggressive, seeking mechanisms and not merely 
passive receivers” (Bloomer and Moore, 1977, 
33) as we move about a landscape. When we 
think about how we approach and arrive at an 
anticipated destination, it really isn’t a stretch to 
consider our senses as aggressively seeking out 
particular stimuli, anticipated stimuli. Remember 
we are pattern seekers. We look for our expectations to be fulfilled and at times even surprised.
I’ve always liked this very 
useful passage from John 
Fowles…It’s from a review 
of William Trevor’s book The 
News from Ireland: ‘I remember 
years ago watching the 
commercial folk-tale tellers in a 
Cairo bazaar. All writers ought 
to have observed this ancient 
practice of oral narrative – 
all critics likewise. Getting 
the audience, I remarked, 
depended not at all on 
216
preaching and philosophizing 
but very much on baser tricks 
of the trade: in short, on 
pleasing, wooing, luring the 
listeners into the palm of one’s 
hand’.
(Kooser, 2005, 23)
To paraphrase Kooser, the title and first few lines 
of your narrative “represent the hand you extend 
in friendship toward your reader…you want to 
make a good impression. You also want to swiftly 
and gracefully draw your reader in” (Kooser, 
2005, 25). Relate this understanding to what 
your design is to convey as its first impression. 
That is your design’s hand extended in friendship. How will it lure and woo a person into your 
design? Another way to consider first impressions 
is Kooser’s thought that “Titles are very important tools for delivering information and setting 
expectations” (27).
Edgar Allen Poe was a master at not only providing first impressions but reinforcing them 
multiple times in a story’s first page. An excellent 
example is Poe’s three-word title to his short story 
The Landscape Garden (Poe, 1904). If you analyze 
the three words, keeping in mind the story was 
originally written in 1848, you come to find out 
that Poe’s title gives you a summary of the story 
to follow. Even before the actual story’s text starts, 
he further expands upon it by introducing Giles 
Fletcher’s poem just below the title. As for the title, 
“Landscape” is wild and on its own. “Garden” is 
the human control or cultivation of land and vegetation. As you work to unpack those two words 
in the title, ask, why did he say “The Landscape 
Garden” and not “A Landscape Garden”?
Kooser reinforces Rae’s advice to not censor 
your early drafts when he speaks to rules of 
writing. 
Well, there are no should or 
should nots in writing poetry. 
You can do whatever you feel 
like doing, pants on or pants 
off. Part of the joy of writing, 
or of practicing any art, comes 
from the freedom to choose.
(Kooser, 2005, 35)
If we consider poets as designers, then Kooser is 
talking to us when he says: 
Thousands of readers love 
Robert Frost’s ‘Stopping by 
Woods on a Snowy Evening,’ 
but very few of us care that it 
was written in a complicated 
form with a demanding rhyme 
scheme. The beauty of Frost’s 
poetry catches the reader, not 
the fact that he was able to 
shoehorn that beauty into a 
difficult literary structure. Of 
course the form lends rhythm 
and music, but we don’t 
start out by remarking upon 
form. Surely Frost must’ve 
been pleased with himself for 
mastering that structure, for 
meeting its difficult challenges, 
but just as surely he would 
have known that the great 
majority of his readers would 
probably appreciate his 
poem without noticing this 
technical accomplishment, 
being, as could be expected, 
far from engaged by the poem’s 
atmospheric effects: the little 
217
horse with its harness bells, 
the mysterious wood, and 
the soft and silent snow. The 
complicated literary form 
of ‘Stopping by Woods’ is 
inseparable from the poem, of 
course, but it is all but invisible 
to the average reader. One of 
that poem’s most important 
achievements is to have kept its 
structure from calling attention 
to itself.
(Kooser, 2005, 39)
Whenever I (Bob Scarfo) think, “the best design 
is one no one knows was designed” I think of 
Olmsted’s forested approach to the Biltmore 
Estate near Ashville, North Carolina.
Rae, Kooser, and you will read Lamott all 
believe that a good writer, and I’ll add, a good 
designer, can by carefully selecting their design’s 
details guide their readers or design participants’ 
responses to a great degree. Given the Imperial 
Tea Garden example (Benzel, 1998, 175–176) 
you read about back in Chapter 5, I have to say 
that designers can also guide people’s behavioral 
responses, and their accompanying experiences.
Again, I find the similarity between poetry 
and design to be striking. In the following quote, 
replace “poem” with “design” and “poet” with 
“designer.” 
Reading, you turn a page to a 
poem you haven’t encountered 
before…As you begin to read, 
to follow the poem word by 
word, the poet sets out one 
thing after another [before 
you]. With every noun the poet 
sets out, there is something for 
you to envision, first a chicken, 
then a washing machine, then 
a half-melted candle in the 
neck of a jug. Verbs move these 
things around, defining their 
actions.
(Kooser, 2005, 111)
Actually, Hughes, Kooser, and Rae say much the 
same thing from slightly different perspectives. 
Bob Hughes’ thoughts on computer-generated 
narrative paths (Hughes, 1997) find that 
Most approaches to computergenerated narrative focus 
entirely on the creation of 
paths. But there is much 
more to narrative than this…
Each path is chiefly a route 
through a particular terrain 
– and the terrain is the main 
thing. Each is popular because 
it is a very good route that 
begins promisingly, develops 
interestingly, and concludes 
satisfyingly. However, the Pyg 
Figure 8.2 Pyg Track, Mount Snowdon, Wales; 
Shutterstock ID: 1153739200.
218
track [up Mount Snowdon] is 
no use without its surroundings 
and if you were to divorce it 
from the landscape, you would 
have nothing very much.
(Hughes, 1997)
Hughes does make a point worth considering. But, 
given the control the changing path’s surface has 
over one’s experiences in the Imperial Tea Garden, 
I feel there is an interdependency between path 
and surrounding terrain. As Hughes notes, “…Pyg 
track [up Mount Snowdon] is no use without its 
surroundings…” but then would Mount Snowdon 
exist in so many people’s memories, letters to 
friends and family, and photo albums without Pyg 
Track? Take a moment to challenge your thinking. 
Put Hughes’ thinking of path as “chiefly a route 
through a particular terrain [where] the terrain is 
the main thing” together with Kandinshy’s concept 
of a line as a “track made by the moving point” 
(1979, 57). For me, this is what a written narrative 
and a landscape-as-narrative are all about the interplay between the path and its surroundings. Only 
you are designing the surroundings and your path 
brings people to them.
Hughes plays with a number of variations on 
this idea. If I understand him, a narrative’s sentences are segments of a path. As they are read, 
a landscape forms around them – in the reader’s 
mind. In a playful way this echoes Simonds’ idea 
of designing for experiences and people’s expectations and Rae’s recommendation to give your 
character(s) the freedom to take you on their path 
through your emerging design; or we could say 
“their emerging design.”
Hughes (1997) provides two examples of what 
he means by different routes having the same 
goal. Advertising copywriters “In a really good 
campaign (such as David Abbott’s classic press 
campaigns for Volvo in the 1980s) the start-point 
of each ad is different, so is the way it develops, 
but it is still somehow the same story, every time, 
however you tell it. You are taking the reader 
“over the same ground” again and again. Good 
salesmen do this to an even greater extent: “their 
‘terrain’ is the product, and they take every single 
customer through it by a different route, tailored 
exclusively for them, on the fly, in real time” yet 
with the same goal – the sale.”
Four of Abbott’s ads, in bold 
type, along with images of 
various models of Volvo, say:
“TO A RADAR GUN THEY 
LOOK EXACTLY ALIKE”
“How to survive a mid-life 
crisis with dignity”
“Invest in durable goods”
(and with a shot of the car’s 
stop lights on, “100 TO 0 IN 
3.2 SECONDS”
Hughes’ “second insight came when [he] read 
Frances M. Yates’s ‘The Art of Memory’ (Hughes, 
1997, 4). Yates explains the classical training 
system for orators, whereby they built up imaginary places for themselves – memory palaces, 
cities and theatres – in which to store the components of a train of an argument. When preparing 
an argument, they would plan a route through 
the palace and place mnemonic objects along it. 
When the time came to speak, they would simply 
walk over their ready-planned route, presenting 
each item to the audience.”
Most poets wish to achieve 
some definite effect upon 
their readers, and a reader’s 
collective associations with 
words have a lot to do that 
effect….There are many 
ways…but one important way 
is to try to limit the variety of 
219
associations a reader may have. 
You can do this with modifiers, 
especially adjectives.
(Kooser, 2005, 112)
To say “path” is one thing; “well-trodden path” is 
another; and “well-trodden muddy path” another 
still. Take a second and think. Nouns, like objects 
in a design, bring with them numerous possible 
associations in people’s minds. Modified with the 
appropriate adjectives you can reduce the number 
of associations that come to people’s minds. In 
Kooser’s words, you can “use adjectives sparingly 
and with precision to exclude the associations you 
don’t want, and to make the remaining things 
on the table work toward the effect you want to 
achieve” (Kooser, 2005, 113).
Consider Kooser’s thoughts on nouns and 
adjectives. Nouns, the things that come to make 
up your design and delineate activity settings, generate numerous associations. Adjectives modify 
and refine what the things (nouns) display. In 
doing so they provide associations related to 
place and history. Even with little knowledge of a 
locale’s history one still senses something is new or 
rustic from the materials, the way they are applied 
and the way they are finished.
When writing even a brief 
poem, you have hundreds of 
decisions to make – choices 
of words, of syntax, of 
punctuation, of rhythm, and 
so on…Every word must be 
selected for its appropriateness 
to the task at hand, just as 
each part of a machine must 
contribute to its effectiveness. 
Each choice the poet makes 
must bring the poem a 
little closer to its potential. 
It is impossible to achieve 
perfection, but any poem will 
be more effective if it falls just a 
little short of perfection rather 
than a long way short.
(Kooser, 2005, 120)
Again, here, the comparison of poet to designer 
and poem to design is instructional.
All of the above is pertinent to design and the 
designer-as-author, or poet, or choreographer. Here 
again, there is a creative progression that goes from 
general to increasingly specific considerations. As 
Kooser says, “every word must be selected for its 
appropriateness to the task at hand” (120). So, 
Figure 8.3 Wall is a noun. The modifying adjectives are the wall’s treatment or character: stone, 
poured concrete, vegetated. Photos by author.
220
­identify the task at hand and as Rae says, let your 
characters run free. Don’t force them; go with them. 
Let them introduce you to the magnitude and 
nuance of what appears along and gives form and 
character to their paths. “Let the stories play themselves out on the screen in your mind with a volition 
all their own” (Rae, 1996, 5).
GETTING READY TO WRITE
In the same way so many people see what you do 
as a designer as magic I am sure a lot of you consider what writers do as magic, too. In an effort 
to dispel that silliness, I couldn’t help myself, I 
had to take some space here to share a bit of Anne 
Lamott’s “Shitty First Drafts.” In that chapter, in 
Bird by Bird (1994, 21–27), she offers so much 
through her down and dirty, candid introduction 
to writing. What’s here is only the briefest of summaries of her message in that chapter. You would 
do well to find a library copy or purchase a used 
copy and read the whole chapter. Actually, Bird 
by Bird is not only a wonderful introduction to 
writing but also living life. Its subtitle is “some 
instructions on writing and life.”
Now, practically even better 
news than that of short 
assignments is the idea of 
shitty first drafts. All good 
writers write them. This is 
how they end up with good 
second drafts and terrific third 
drafts…I know some very great 
writers…not one of them sits 
down routinely feeling wildly 
enthusiastic and confident. Not 
one of them writes elegant first 
drafts…The first draft is the 
child’s draft, where you let it all 
pour out and then let it romp 
all over the place, knowing 
that no one is going to see it 
and that you can shape it later. 
You just let this childlike part 
of you channel whatever voices 
and visions come through and 
onto the page. If one of the 
characters wants to say, ‘Well, 
so what, Mr. Poopy Pants?’ 
you let her. No one is going 
to see it….Almost all good 
writing begins with terrible 
first efforts…Start by getting 
something – anything – down 
on paper. A friend of mine says 
that the first draft is the down 
draft – you just get it down. 
The second draft is the up 
draft – you fix it up. You try to 
say what you have to say more 
accurately. And the third draft 
is the dental draft, where you 
check every tooth, to see if it’s 
loose or cramped or decayed, or 
even, God help us, healthy.
(Lamott, 1994, 21–26)
The following is important enough to share at 
this time. The reason understanding your potential users’ emotional state of mind is so critical 
comes from what I have seen and heard from my 
landscape narrative workshop participants over 
the years. Considering their character(s) likely 
states of mind more so than gender, age, physical 
abilities, and other usual user descriptors allowed 
workshop participants to expand their understanding of the kinds of people coming to their 
site and the array of experiences they might anticipate encountering.
221
In so doing, the workshop designer-authors 
were then able develop narratives for quite a 
diverse collection of characters and their stories. 
Most of the experiences you’ll design for are 
common to people around the world. For 
example, everyone wants to experience happiness 
no matter age, sex, height, weight. Understanding 
happiness at a conceptual level, or whatever other 
experience you seek, helps identify generalities 
that when included in your narrative contribute 
to a design that works with a larger user cohort. 
Happiness emerges from what? Less than happy. 
It has to be compared to something. Seeking a 
sense of well-being or comfort usually contrasts 
with darkness, confusion, and limited understanding. Better yet, people will come to your site 
from some place, an emotional place. Knowing, 
or at least having a sense of where they are coming 
from emotionally gives your narrative a starting 
point. A starting point calls for what follows: 
sadness to happiness, confusion to comfort, darkness to light. What is it they hope to expand upon, 
or diminish? This is where you begin to “see” and 
“describe” what I call environmental metaphors.
Simonds recognized the visual line character of 
simplistic landscape settings capable of triggering 
particular emotions. How might your character 
environmentally experience their state of mind? 
How might it transition as he/she approaches 
your site, arrives at its entry, and enters it, progresses through it in your narrative? As an 
example, imagine you’ve been asked to design a 
small urban park, a vest pocket park. You might 
start by considering your potential users as living 
with the pressures of business, or chaos of the city. 
Why would they step off the treadmill and come 
into your park? What is the array of experiences 
they would be seeking? How far down the sidewalk leading to your park do they see signals that 
“say” park? What do the signals indicate? What 
are the pedestrians expecting to experience as 
they approach the park entrance? Use Rae’s advice 
and let them help you “see” how their experience 
unfolds?
SAMPLE NARRATIVES
Below are two examples of CalPoly Pomona 
landscape architecture students’ narratives developed for their Healing Garden workshop. The 
first narrative’s main character may surprise you. 
A third example was written by a Washington 
State University landscape architecture student 
for the Morning Star Boys Ranch in Spokane, 
Washington. The Boys’ Ranch works with troubled youth. Sometimes the young men do not 
want to have to stay at the ranch, which in many 
respects, set in the countryside, is a ranch. We 
were asked to develop a master plan for the facility and did so with the help of the boys, staff, and 
spiritual leader, Father Joe.
HEALING GARDEN 
NARRATIVE #1: THE 
GARDEN’S DUTY
This time of year is a season of changes. I will soon 
have a fluffy white blanket adorning me. But for 
now I am satisfied to show my coat of many colors. 
Do you hear that? It sounds as though someone 
is coming. This one shows signs of worry. What 
can I offer her? I hope she’ll find comfort sitting 
under my friend’s gentle branches, rustling in the 
wind. If she sat there she would surely hear the 
Figure 8.4 Lines and objects indicative of  
emotions. Simonds (2006, 160). Courtesy 
McGraw Hill.
222
soft chirping of the robins and the delicate dribble 
of my fountain.
She wanders by this place I picked for her. 
But, what else can I offer her? She is starting to 
cry now, kicking some of my coat’s patches as 
she goes. I hope she will meander a little further 
so my evergreen friends can help her. Could the 
pleasing smell of pine have caught her attention? 
She seems to have found a little cove to nestle in 
while she cries. This continues for a while, but 
then she stops. A squirrel darting up and down 
the tree caught her attention. Is that an attempt 
at a half smile as my robin friend quickly snatches 
the squirrel’s dropped treasure? I can only hope I 
have helped ease her pain.
HEALING GARDEN 
NARRATIVE #2: THE 
GARDEN AND ME
I wake up and feel I need to get some fresh 
air. When I approach the window to open it I 
notice the garden below. I wonder if the beautiful bouquet of flowers someone placed on my 
bedside table came from the garden. Intrigued, I 
am drawn outside to discover the source of the 
flowers. As I exit the double doors, which face the 
entrance to the garden, I am stunned by the bright 
colors of the wildflowers. My eyes are adjusting 
to the sunlight. The gentle swaying of the foliage 
beckons me to enter. As I enter I notice these 
words that provide me with a sense of comfort 
and safety. (The words were not provided.)
As the gate opens I see that the path diverges and 
I have a choice to make. I hear wind chimes faintly 
coming from the direction of one of the paths. 
As I proceed toward the sound I am mesmerized 
and enchanted. I just realized that there is a light 
breeze and the air feels cool and clean. Now I am 
surrounded and sheltered by trees. I can hardly feel 
any wind here, but the enchanting sounds of the 
delicate chimes resonate in this space.
I pause and listen. I notice the sounds of the 
birds above and the rustle of the leaves. I have been 
so focused on the wind chimes that I have just now 
noticed the sound of water, although I cannot tell 
where it is coming from. I follow its lead. I know it 
is nearby but the plants around me conceal it from 
view. The view opens and I feel satisfied, before me 
are ducks and I can make out the outlines of fish in 
the pool the water has collected in.
My face detects the moisture and coolness in 
the air here. I breathe the moisture in and catch 
the faint fragrance of herbs and orange. I follow 
my nose to discover a wide-open space, sunny and 
warm. The sight of growing plants that bear fruit 
excites me. I think of what we ate for dinner last 
night and I realize that this is the very place that 
some of our seasonings came from. The homegrown plants give me life and I begin to feel at 
home. Someone left a bucket of ripe apples out. 
A shady picnic table entices me to sit down and 
I enjoy a fruit. I would like to give back to this 
garden, perhaps I will be able to tend a patch. I 
should try to make this place more a home for me.
MORNING STAR BOYS’ 
RANCH NARRATIVE
The Beginning
I can’t believe they are sending me here. I’d rather 
be anywhere; even the streets are better than 
a stupid ranch. They’re not making me into a 
cowboy.
The Approach
Is that it? There aren’t any fences or bars. How do 
they expect to keep me here? Hey, they’ve got a 
baseball field, animals, horse trails, open fields… 
What is this Club Med? This is going to be too 
easy. If they’re dumb enough not to have bars, they 
ought to be easy enough to manipulate….Well at 
least I’ll have a roof over my head and food. If I 
don’t like it I can always run away. After all, no bars.
The Recluse
They can lead a horse to water, but they can’t 
make it drink. I don’t care what they do, I won’t 
223
leave my room. I won’t join any of their idiotic 
activities. I’ll show them! See a psychiatrist my ass! 
I won’t say a word to him. I’ll sit there in silence 
the whole time. We’ll see how well this “Therapy” 
BS works! I have to at least go to the activities, 
huh? Well, you can’t force me to join in. You can’t 
make me do anything I don’t want to.
The New Kid
I’m bored. Maybe I’ll join in after all. This game 
sucks, but at least it will give me something to do. 
What are they staring at? I’ll give them something 
to stare at. Hey you, give me that ball! What? Do 
you want to make me? Come on you****! I’ll 
show you!
Judgment
They aren’t even going to punish me? “Go to 
your room.” What am I, a five-year-old? I don’t 
care if I have to stay in here forever. It’s better than 
joining their stupid activities. Look at those guys 
over there. Doin’ whatever they’re told, giving 
into their tactics. Well, I won’t give in. Not me. 
I’ll just sit here ‘til hell freezes over… They do 
look like they’re having fun though….I wonder 
what they’re doing over there in that field…?
The Introduction
I hate school. I always feel like such a moron when 
the teacher calls on me. I hate homework even 
more. I just won’t do it. Instead, I’ll….What? 
You expect me to plant a garden? I don’t think so 
man gardening is for sissies….Look at that punk, 
weeding like there’s no tomorrow. Since you’re so 
good at it, you might as well weed my plot while 
you’re at it. Oh yeah? How would you like to eat 
this nice juicy slug? Well, you just wait. I’ll get 
you…..I hate school, but gardening is even worse.
Guilty by Association
I hate the other guys in my living group. They’re 
such a goody-goodies. I wonder why they won’t 
stand up to me. What cowards. And they do 
everything they’re told, without question. I 
wonder what they know that I don’t. Hey, how 
come he gets to go horseback riding and I have to 
stay in my room? It’s not fair.
Ownership
OK, which one of you ran through my gardenias? I spent an hour weeding them yesterday, and 
when I find out which one of you did it…I get 
recreation time today? Right on! Maybe this place 
isn’t so bad after all. Don’t tell anyone but I’m 
beginning to have a new respect for my roomie. 
Did I say respect? Hey Weed Wacker, race you 
to the basketball court! We’ll see who cleans up 
around here!
Getting Along
This “family” stuff isn’t so bad after all. I wish my 
real family was more like this. I still hate group 
therapy, but at least I get a little more respect now. 
As for the gardening, it’s not so bad after all. I 
never knew there were so many kinds of vegetables! Next week my group gets to go camping. I 
can’t wait maybe if we behave ourselves, we can 
stay an extra night. I’m beginning to sound like 
Father Joe.
Backsliding
Everything was going so well until today. I had 
everyone right where I wanted ‘em. But then I 
got that question wrong in class, and it all went 
downhill from there. Who cares what Thomas 
Edison did? It didn’t affect me any. I wish everyone would just go away and leave me alone. No, I 
don’t want to join in your stupid game. Go away 
before I kick your ass!
Moving Forward
That’s strange. They act like nothing even happened. Not only that, but they’re letting me have 
my own booth at the Harvest Festival. I thought 
224
I’d be in trouble for what happened last week….
They say if I improve my History and English, I 
can go to the city high school next semester. If 
I study extra hard, maybe I won’t have to retake 
my junior year….I hope my booth does well at 
the Festival so I can make some extra money for 
Christmas.
Rewarding Actions
I can’t believe I won second place in the largest 
pumpkin contest! I’ve never won anything before. 
Did you see the look on their faces when I stepped 
up on the platform to claim my prize? I’ve never 
been this important before. And next year, I’m 
going to take first. With a little work, I bet I can 
concoct a better fertilizer than any of these guys.
A Helping Hand
Look at that new kid over there. He acts just like I 
did when I first came here. I wonder…? Not good 
at math, huh? That happens to be the one thing 
I’m good at – besides growing the biggest pumpkins around. Want some help? OK then. Let me 
know if you change your mind….Is it all right if 
I work a few extra hours in the greenhouse? If I 
can just perfect this new type of string bean I’ve 
been working on, I’ll have it ready to plant in the 
spring.
A Gentle Nudge
Living out here in this apartment has helped a 
lot. I think I might just be able to make it now 
“outside.”
Buck says I have a good chance of landing 
a job as an agricultural research company with 
the experience I gained working in the greenhouse. With the money I’ve saved over the last 
year and a half plus the money I’ll earn at this 
year’s Spring Fest I should be able to buy that 
car I’ve had my eyes on. Now my only worry 
is passing my last history exam. Then graduation, here I come!….I can’t believe it’s time to 
leave already. Seems like I just got here. I’ll miss 
this place. And who will take over my zucchini 
patch? They better do a good job of it, or I 
might have to come back…
What is interesting with the narratives above is 
the lack of explicit descriptors of the spaces. Yet, 
if you think about the characters’ behaviors and 
attitudes as described, you can see how transferring the written narrative into a storyboard brings 
the spaces into “view,” reinforcing Lefebvre’s 
dictum that space is a social product (1994).
NOW IT IS YOUR TURN – 
LET’S GET STARTED ON 
YOUR NARRATIVE
You have a choice. You can use the Healing 
Garden Project introduced here and write a narrative for it, interpret it into a storyboard, and 
then transpose the storyboard into a landscape 
design. There are points in the book where you 
are not given step-by-step instructions or visual 
examples. The reason is my belief that being given 
answers is not learning. Working for answers 
brings understanding. What I would like you to 
do is experience writing a narrative, sketching up 
a storyboard, even a simple one, and developing 
a design. These are the suggested steps. Apply 
them to your own project, or the Healing Garden 
project laid out below. Experience the process 
and its idiosyncrasies. Work through them and 
develop a better system than I’m giving you here. 
The overall narrative-storyboard-design process is 
a strong, user-centered approach to design, but 
it can be made stronger. You can help make it 
stronger by experiencing it, reformulating those 
experiences, and trying it out.
For those of you who want to work on the 
Healing Garden project, here it is.
An Introduction to the Providence Sacred 
Heart Medical Center Garden Project. This 
project is dedicated to Sister Bernadette and her 
wish for people to have a place in which they find 
solace.
Situation: Sister Bernadette, a nun with 
the Sisters of Providence, called you together 
225
to explore design options for a special kind of 
healing garden. She notes, 
Sacred Heart Hospital is 
technologically on the cutting 
edge with regard to healing 
the physical body. The Sisters 
want to see a balance brought 
to patients’ healing experience, 
that of their families and 
friends, and the greater staff. 
You have a chance to introduce 
a healing environment that 
works in a more holistic way 
with people’s spirits, minds, and 
bodies.
Integrated with the diverse, holistic healing-related 
programs to be offered in the soon-to-be renovated 
Providence Center for Faith and Healing building 
along the western boundary of the site, the healing 
garden will benefit patients and their families, 
doctors, nurses, staff, and visiting scholars and the 
students who study with them. The garden’s visitors 
and the Providence Center’s primary clientele are the 
terminally ill and their families and friends. As part 
of their welcome to the hospital and the Faith and 
Healing Center, people will be introduced through 
an orientation program to the healing garden 
and available counseling services. The Providence 
Sisters anticipate that hospital staff who are daily 
surrounded with terminal illnesses will regularly 
avail themselves of the garden. Garden strollers will 
enter the garden either from the double doors on 
the ground floor of the Providence Center for Faith 
and Healing (located along the western boundary) 
or from a gateway just off Eighth Avenue (along the 
garden’s northern boundary).
Sister B’s two explicit wishes are that the garden 
be spiritual but not denominational and that it 
always be open to those who need it. “There will 
not be any religious iconography. Yet, people of 
all religions are to feel welcome.” As a meditative 
place, the garden is to help people find their way, 
find solace.
Ideally the garden is to help visitors replace 
the all too frequent fear and anger associated with 
impending death with a growing understanding 
and acceptance. 
This two acres of Eden is to 
be available to people day 
in and day out, twenty-four 
Figure 8.5 Aerial of Healing Garden Site; Google Maps; Imagery ©2022 CNES/ Airbus, Maxar Technologies. U.S. Geological Survey Map data © 2022.
226
hours a day, through every 
season. They are to be able 
to physically and spiritually 
meander about garden and 
to find solace in seclusion. In 
their moving about in a subtle 
beauty, patients, doctors, staff, 
and families will all come to 
a realization that all hasn’t 
been lost. As for myself, I 
want to walk the garden on a 
winter’s evening and hear snow 
crunching under my feet.
Site: the approximately two-acre garden area is 
surrounded on the east, south, and west sides 
by four-story brick buildings and open to the 
north. The old garden and now dilapidated 
swimming pool were used by nurse trainees 
who resided in the building along the garden’s 
eastern boundary. That building is now a residence for the elderly and for dementia patients. 
While these folks may use the walkway alongside that building, they will not be able to access 
the garden. Their outdoor needs are fulfilled by 
facilities on the other side of their building. 
However, many of them will be able to view 
the garden from their rooms and two gathering 
rooms on the second and third floors.
Starting into the site from Eighth Avenue (on 
the north), the ground rises six or seven feet, crests 
at the garden’s entryway, and then dips down to 
a concrete-lined pool at the base of a large basalt 
outcrop at the back of the site. A concrete-lined 
stream emanating from the heart of the site flows 
into the pool. The stream originates in the center 
of the site, runs north, and then curves west into 
the pool by the basalt outcrop. The stream’s curvature runs along the base of a small knoll topped 
by two trees, a lamppost, and a bench seat. From 
the western side of the stream the land slopes up 
about 7 feet to this centralized high point at the 
base of the knoll. Halfway down the southern 
side of the knoll are the remains of a large brick 
barbecue pit. To the south of that are the empty 
remains of a large oddly shaped swimming pool 
which was fed by springs coming down off the hill 
to the south of the south-bounding building. The 
springs are still accessible, so the availability of 
water is no problem. Due to the low site elevation 
at the southern end of the site and the higher elevation to the north along Eighth Avenue removing surface drainage is a concern.
Figure 8.6 Composite of original healing garden site. Looking south into the back half of the  
original site. Photos by author.
227
Looking into the site from Eighth Avenue, the 
first third of the site is heavily overgrown and will 
need thinning and to be replaced. All site features 
are in disrepair and cannot be salvaged.
The four-story brick structure along the south 
end of the site is the Providence Auditorium. 
There are windows along the length of the enclosing wall. The doors at both ends of the building 
wall are emergency exits and must remain unobstructed.
The southern portion of the western enclosing structures houses the soon-to-be torn down 
hospital laundry. The structure itself is in excellent condition and able to support just about any 
amount of weight brought to it. While the Sisters 
of Providence have only talked about the structure as being torn down, their way of thinking 
leaves the door open for ideas regarding renovations associated with the Providence Center and 
garden. From inside the garden the four-story 
brick structure has industrial-sized windows and 
a four-story wrought iron fire escape. Although 
the two western buildings’ walls abut each other 
and appear continuous, they are separated on the 
street side of the buildings by an employee entryway. Also, the laundry facility’s street side façade 
is one story tall. The street side façade is made up 
of 8′ tall arched windows that look into both the 
street-level and lower floor of the laundry.
The Providence Center for Faith and Healing, 
along the western boundary, is to be renovated. The 
Center will house programs related to various forms 
of therapy: dance, aroma, herbal, music, sandplay, 
and the like. It will also, at the south end, house a 
library and study area for up to five resident scholars 
here on sabbatical to research aspects of healing. The 
building is all brick. The four floors are reinforced 
concrete. There are windows running the length of 
each of the four floors of the building. The building used to be a convent, so most of the windows 
open into small rooms. The bank of larger windows 
along the garden’s ground floor opens into what was 
a cafeteria. You will be working with an architect 
and an interior designer to recommend changes to 
both the interior spaces and the exterior façade of 
the structure.
Directly across Eighth Avenue, to the north, is 
the hospital’s emergency entrance. The arrival and 
departure of ambulances are a regular occurrence. 
SPOILER ALERT: the arrival and departure of 
emergency vehicles and helicopters landing on 
the roof atop the emergency building are surprisingly not distracting while in the garden area.
GETTING STARTED
While you got a lot of information on the garden, 
most of what you read about the site really doesn’t 
matter at this point. It will apply some during 
your storyboarding and then definitely more 
when you turn your storyboard into your final 
design. Consider the following, then maybe take 
a day off and let your story emerge from your 
thinking. Then start writing as you allow your 
character or characters to lead you toward, into, 
and around your garden.
CONSIDERATIONS ON 
WRITING A NARRATIVE
•	 Prepare yourself. Maybe reading Elisabeth 
Kübler-Ross’s “On Death and Dying” will help 
you understand people’s state of mind. Or, web 
search reviews of her book for a quicker introduction.
•	 Write/think in terms of first- or second-person 
experiences. Do not write about “a person.” 
Write through your character’s thoughts and 
emotions.
•	 Where are they coming from emotionally? 
What is their first impression? What expresses 
it? Where is it, where does their narrative start? 
What do they experience between their first 
impressions and arrival at the garden entry?
•	 What is the theme, its introduction with the 
first impression, how does it develop, to what 
kind of conclusion? In what state of mind do 
you wish the garden participants to leave?
•	 Make the narrative experiential, feel what your 
character’s senses are drawing in.
•	 Write with sensitivity; without evaluation (that 
will come later).
•	 Let your character(s) take over, don’t make 
them do things. They will inform you as to 
what they are feeling.
228
•	 Watch their actions; consider what’s around 
them that they are reacting to?
COMPOSITION
•	 Developing your character’s state of mind, 
personal perspective, transitioning locations, 
social/cultural values and idiosyncrasies.
•	 Stage set: foreground, middle ground, background; stage right; stage left. Progression.
•	 Setting (place/location) reflective of someone’s 
mental state.
•	 What is the mental state with which people 
arrive at the site?
•	 How will the garden deal with it and, with 
luck, transform it? Through what (thematic) progression?
•	 Experiential setting; where do they arrive in 
the theme’s progression; in what surroundings do they enter and progress? Always 
remembering their state of mind.
BENEFITS OF YOUR 
NARRATIVE
•	 Insider’s view/experiences versus impersonal 
plan view.
•	 Focusing on the design’s theme as seen/experienced by your character removes you from the 
equation.
•	 When you present your narrative-storyboard 
through your character(s) clients will ask questions about them and not “why did you do 
this?” or “why did you do that?” The first time 
that happens it is really exciting.
•	 Build a continuity across the space and time. 
Once you start a narrative you’ve focused on a 
theme to be developed. How does the theme 
develop? What are the stages? How might they 
be environmentally expressed?
•	 What is the language associated with the 
theme your character is experiencing? What is 
the language of solace?
•	 This approach builds on the opportunities and 
constraints of the setting and place.
Okay, with all this thinking on why narrative 
brings such a valuable contribution to landscape 
architectural design, you’ve succeeded in putting 
off writing a narrative. Now is the time to turn on 
Rae’s movie in your mind, or what the old Radio 
Days referred to as The Theater of the Mind. You 
gotta do it eventually. As Rae says, it is actually 
quite easy once you experience it. Do it now. 
Don’t worry about how it reads. It is a first draft. 
A first draft of your narrative, maybe two pages. 
That is a good start, but only that, a good start. 
You want to use your understanding of why your 
characters would likely come to your site. It’ll get 
clearer as you write, and then as you review what 
you wrote on your own and then with others. This 
is creativity at work. A somewhat different kind of 
creativity than you’re used to – a kind of collective 
creativity. Here is where you link meaning and 
imagination guided by coherence and continuity provided through your narrative’s character(s) 
acting out in your mind’s eye.
Take a break, gestate, jot down notes as they 
come to you, and come back writing.
Figure 8.7 Note taking worksheet for  
narrative reviewers. Prepared by author.  
Credit: Kyaw Thi
229
NARRATIVE IS IN THE CAN 
(WELL, ALMOST)
Once you’ve got a draft of your narrative, remember Lamott’s “shitty first drafts.” Don’t go overboard stressing out about how complete it is (or 
isn’t), gather a couple, three friends together. Give 
each a copy of your narrative to follow along as 
you read it out loud. In fact, test it before you 
gather your friends or work cohorts. Find a quiet 
place and read it out loud. I guarantee you will 
hear gaps, misdirections, incomplete actions or 
thoughts. That exercise will be your second step 
to clarification following your writing. Remember 
shitty first drafts.
Using the Healing Garden Narrative #1 from 
above, here is what my team’s note-taking sheet 
looked like.
Now get your people together. Tell them what you 
are doing and what you expect of them. Ask them 
to listen for and comment on points in the narrative that are vague, that have gaps between moments 
or people’s experiences, or need an additional head 
turn, glance up or down, sound, or aroma.
Ask your friends to use their copy of your narrative to jot down notes, questions, thoughts on 
additions, and more and to hold their comments 
till you’re done. Once done, everyone discusses 
their thoughts. I like to record the discussion.
Work to make changes to your narrative as the 
discussion goes along. While you will end up with 
a tightened draft of your narrative, if you have 
time, put it aside for a day. When you are fresh 
and snappy bright reread what you produced and 
make what needed edits pop out at you. Now, on 
to storyboarding. 
9
Storyboarding: Turning 
Words into Images
T
he cinematic nature of storyboarding provides a natural progression for your narrative, or scenario, to become a landscape 
architectural design. Landscape isn’t a thing; it is 
a collection of meaningful and sequential experiences. For those for whom you design, the landscape is the stage on which they live life, raise 
families, play, learn, earn a living, and grow old. 
Storyboarding is used by major film directors and 
logistic planners. Storyboards save movie makers’ 
millions and millions of dollars in production 
costs as kind of a visual test before the cameras 
start rolling. Storyboarding, as a serial or sequential visual planning tool, along with your narrative, 
captures your clients’ minds and imaginations by 
allowing them to participate in your designs. This 
is where you cannot escape the fact you design 
living environments for others. This is also where 
you begin to realize the power you have to influence other people’s lives and well-being. As such, 
this is where you begin to realize the responsibilities 
that come with designing environments and the 
lifeworlds for others. Keep in mind, those “others” 
may be animals, birds, or aquatic or marine life.
The quote below is so rich in the benefits storyboarding brings to landscape architectural, architectural, and interior design I had to include the 
entire paragraph. As you read it, consider how 
what you read would appear in an environmental 
design process or product.
The storyboard, adapted from 
the technique of animation 
cinema, proved, nevertheless, 
so useful a device…For the 
director, the storyboard offered 
a way of planning on several 
levels: the composition of 
shots, their size, and their 
interrelation with the flow 
of the narrative. It allowed 
one to determine needed 
equipment and location sites. 
It represented an intermediate 
stage between the script and the 
editing process: it could, in fact, 
be seen as a form of pre-editing. 
It facilitated communication 
between the director and 
producer, on the one hand, 
and between the director and 
technical crew, on the other. 
The pictorial schema was often, 
but not always, supplemented 
by written instructions as to 
direction of movement within 
the shot, duration, camera 
movement. And since it can, in 
addition, specify lens changes, 
dissolves, and the projected 
use of other optical effects, the 
range of detail and accuracy 
of the storyboarding process is, 
therefore, very wide.
(Pace Gallery, 1993, 8)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-10
231
232
By now I’m guessing you are used to substituting landscape architectural terminology for its 
counterparts in quotes from or about authors and 
writing, poets and poetry, painters and paintings, 
and the like. With cinematography brought into 
consideration, the leap from film making to environmental design should be a small one. If, in that 
regard, your creative juices really start flowing and 
you enjoy testing ways to bring cinematic techniques into landscape, architectural, or interior 
design, get a copy of Dictionary of Film Terms (or 
similar book) (Beaver, 2009) and really challenge 
your creativity. Fill your journal or notebook with 
graphic examples of things like a jump cut, flashback, flash-forward, fade in, or fade out as they 
could appear in an environmental design.
STORYBOARDING
For our purposes as environmental designers, storyboarding is the molding of sequential messages 
triggering a landscape participant’s experiences into 
visual images accompanied with notes on direction 
of movement, progression of view(s), accompanying 
sounds, and more. Given that film budgets these days 
average $100 million, and set and on-location complexities, storyboarding allows the pre-­visualization 
of a film and even the logistical program development that will be needed behind the scenes.
A real eye-opener for me regarding storyboarding was displayed at Seattle’s Pacific Science 
Center as part of a program on Jurassic Park 
(1993). Among the displays was a storyboard, not 
of scenes culminating in the movie, but of heavy 
cranes, camera booms, semi-trailer trucks, water 
trucks, electrical sub-stations, crew housing, and 
more that was needed to produce the scenes seen 
in the movie storyboard and eventually in the 
movie. As Tumminello states, “…whereas comic 
strips entertain, the storyboard is a tool that facilitates production” (2005, 11). In the case of the 
behind-the-scenes production of Jurassic Park we 
could call it a Logistics Storyboard.
Early storyboards looked more like comic 
books, three to six drawings to a panel or page. 
“Because the drawings were confined within the 
panels, presenting a fresh idea or making a change 
was not easily done” (Canemaker, 1999, 8).
Storyboarding, as it exists, is a much more 
flexible tool than its earlier versions. It didn’t 
come into its own until Walt Disney and the 
Disney Company production staff refined 
almost two decades of previous illustrators’ 
work. As the number of sketches grew along 
with the complexity of production, understanding a story’s logical flow and content became an 
increasingly difficult task to which story man 
Webb Smith had a solution. Around 1930 the 
confusion of so many sketches and notes spread 
across floors and desks led Webb Smith to, one 
day, pick up the sketches and pin them all “up 
on walls and large sheets of cork or celotexc 
boards” (Canemaker, 1999, 24).
He pinned all the sketches and 
dialog to the wall in a sequence 
from beginning to end…then 
reworked the sequence…until 
he felt that story continuity 
Figure 9.1 The Beekeeper Storyboards.  
Courtesy, Lynne G. Hood, illustrator, animator, 
author.
233
was achieved…[and] the 
first cartoon using Smith’s 
method…was the 1933 cartoon 
The Three Little Pigs.
(20)
As Walt Disney stated, “the first real storyboard 
was born” (24). With it came a high level of 
flexibility. Thus illustrators, and later film directors, were using storyboarding to produce one 
image per page or sheet of paper. The value of 
storyboarding was well recognized by directors 
like Hitchcock (Psycho, 1960), Martin Scorcese 
(Raging Bull, 1980), and Tim Burton (Edward 
Scissorhands, 1990) who did many of their own 
illustrations as an aid in preplanning film production (Pace Gallery, 1993). If you are able to locate 
the book, Drawing into Film: Directors’ Drawings, 
that accompanied the 1993 Pace Gallery show, 
you’ll enjoy seeing the simplicity of the various 
directors’ storyboard drawings.
“In a storyboard’s sequential presentation of 
narrative and characters, weak spots are easily 
seen and changed, and the all-important storyline 
developed and strengthened” (Canemaker, 1999, 
ix). The same benefits are realized when storyboarding is applied to the development of a landscape design. Please note, a storyboard’s benefits 
are further enhanced when preceded by a written 
first- or second-person narrative or what can be 
considered a script or scenario (Aminzadeh et al., 
2016).
It is important that landscape architecture students recognize that 
Storyboard art represents hours 
of human thought, discussion, 
and arguments, along with 
moments of inspiration. It 
is a [graphic] manifestation 
of the ideas, emotions, 
commitment, and physical 
effort of individual artists and 
writers who must give birth to 
story elements daily. Yet, also 
be willing to ‘kill their darlings’ 
Media-like without hesitation 
and start over again.
(Canemaker, 1999, xi)
As I read about Disney studios being the first 
to create a Story Department, separate from the 
illustrators, just for the creation of stories, I had 
to wonder, what if environmental design firms 
began to adopt the landscape narrative-storyboard 
approach to site design and started using story 
development and storyboards? What if students 
of animation for film, graphic novels, comics, and 
video games came together and hired out their 
services as storyboard illustrators to those environmental design firms?
In Drawing into Film: Directors’ Drawings, The 
Pace Gallery (1993) displays storyboard drawings 
done by 13 movie directors. Among them are 
Alfred Hitchcock, John Huston, Akira Kurosawa, 
Federico Fellini, Terry Gilliam, Martin Scorsese, 
and Tim Burton. In looking at samples of their 
work, it is obvious they were not the best illustrators in the world. Even so, their simple sketches 
saved hundreds of hours, millions of dollars, 
and contributed to numerous classic films. It is 
important to see the simplicity in what some of 
the world’s best movie directors used as a means 
to help them quickly and inexpensively gain 
“maximum control of the factors involved in the 
composition, filming, and editing of the live-­
action film in both its narrative and documentary 
mode” (7).
STUDENT’S NARRATIVE AND 
STORYBOARD
The beginning of this student’s narrative was captured in three simple sketches. More was eventually expressed (contained) in her narrative than 
these initial sketches. But, even with this simple 
set of text and sketches she was off to a good start. 
When sketches and written narrative were shared 
234
with her classmates, the resulting clarifications 
eventually became a complete and much more 
comprehensive narrative and storyboard.
To satisfy your curiosity, here is what is written 
to the left of the three sketches (Courtesy, Jena 
Jauchius):
Top sketch: Across the wetland, I see a landscape I’ve never seen before….trees, like tired old 
men arch over and seem to be entwined with one 
another. I cross the bridge that crosses the wetland 
to see if I can’t discover what this landscape is. The 
only thing I really see is the entrance. But I can see 
that there is much more to it because a snake of 
trees extends into the field beyond.
Middle sketch: I arrive at the entrance. There 
is an odd sign suspended in among 2 trees by a 
tangle of twigs and branches. The sign reads that 
this landscape is Earth Art….representing the 
Spokane Aquifer….I look down the path, but 
can’t see much around the bend. That intrigues 
me and is what draws me in.
Under my feet, stones of different shapes and 
sizes are fitted together to form a smooth trail. 
I look up at the living ceiling and notice at 
how some of the branches have actually grown 
together. Some low hanging leaves tickle my forehead.
Bottom sketch: As the trail rolls along. 
Every so often a break in the trees reveals a 
piece of what I am assuming is earth art and 
a suspended sign tells me more about what it 
represents. I also encounter little areas where 
Figure 9.2 Student’s simple storyboard panel. 
Courtesy Jena Jauchius.
Figure 9.3 Student’s simple storyboard panel: 
top sketch; Courtesy Jena Jauchius.
Figure 9.4 Student’s simple storyboard panel: 
middle sketch; Courtesy Jena Jauchius.
Figure 9.5 Student’s simple storyboard panel: 
bottom sketch; Courtesy Jena Jauchius.
235
exercises and activities take place. In one, I see a 
teacher and a group of students learn what they 
can do to protect the aquifer from pollution. 
Even the tree species, size and color change as 
I walk inside this art piece. Some trees allow a 
decent view into the fields beyond while others 
form a solid wall to divert my attention to the 
other spaces within the design. The trail takes 
me over, under, and through the landscape 
showing me different vistas, revealing more 
interesting ecological sculptures, and teaching 
me more about the aquifer. I round a corner 
and once again catch a glimpse of civilization. I 
know my exploration is nearing closure. I never 
knew this landscape could teach me so much 
about itself.
Take a few moments and reread the above narrative with the aim of finding moments in the 
narrative that would benefit from further clarification. What do you think when you read “I see 
a teacher and a group of students learn what they 
can do to protect the aquifer from pollution.” 
What does the storyboard character see, hear, 
smell, and possibly touch that tells her that the 
students are learning “what they can do to protect 
the aquifer from pollution”? Answering that will 
call for a few more cards with sketches, edits and 
additions to the written narrative to be inserted 
into the storyboard, and in doing so bring greater 
clarity to the final design.
STORYBOARDING – 
FREEHAND OR COMPUTER?
Yes, there is free storyboarding software out there 
but given what others have sketched, some starting with just stick figures, I can’t help but believe 
you can produce storyboard sketches (the flow of 
your characters’ wishes, movements, and experiences), more quickly than you can search a 
storyboarding app’s “gallery” or “library.” Given 
the speed with which you can produce simple 
sketches, with comments, that capture exactly 
what your narrative calls for, I find this comment 
regarding one storyboarding software a bit off the 
mark: “You can also choose from a stock library 
of photographs, graphics and illustrations if you 
don’t have time to create your own.” Software’s 
benefits are in how it allows you, once you have 
your sketches scanned and uploaded to the software, to work with others outside the office, at a 
distance. Others can look over your boards and 
help with editing.
How you approach this next step, turning your 
written narrative into a visual narrative, is up to 
you. Necessities include your favorite marker or 
pencil, index cards or plain sheets of paper, pins, 
and wall space. Get a package of 3″×5″ or 5″×8″ 
index cards. These sizes pretty much approximate the aspect ratio of human eyesight. Two 
approaches to interpreting the imagery contained 
in your written text to your storyboard cards are 
given as follows:
1.	Cut and paste the old way: using scissors cut 
up your narrative in a way that highlights 
each scene, then develop a sketch for each 
scene.
2.	Sketch as you read your narrative: the character(s) acting out in your mind’s eye knows 
what is and is not “seen” in each sentence of 
your narrative.
As you start sketching your visuals don’t hesitate to 
include notes on the appropriate cards that record 
the particulars for the scene/location: sounds, 
movement, aromas or odors, plants with special 
qualities, canopy height, leaf density, and so on 
that would make your character’s experiences as 
complete as possible. Remember, this process is 
one of give and take, expansion of scenes, modifications to scenes, and elimination of some scenes. 
Once you feel comfortable with the scenes you 
generated, pin them up and have a look. Talk your 
way through them – out loud. Does the story flow 
smoothly; does the flow make sense; do you need 
to add a scene/card here or there; more notes as 
to supplemental views or sensations? If you can, 
get away from your narrative/storyboard for a day. 
Do something else, then come back, go through 
it again, and then share it with cohorts or friends. 
Ask them to again review your written narrative 
as you go through your storyboard. Discuss where 
there’s a need for supplemental information (cards 
and notes). How’s it feeling?
236
IDENTIFYING DESIGN 
CRITERIA FOR PARTICULAR 
EMOTIONS
I want to step back here and deal with an issue 
that students brought up on numerous occasions 
and that gave rise to the following exercise. This 
exercise, the Emotion Matrix, will help you with 
your storyboard, and prepare you to move your 
storyboard to final design and the increasingly 
detailed questions you’ll need to answer. The following exercise grew out of students questioning, 
“How do I know what I’m suggesting for objects, 
spaces, materials, and views in the various locations along my character’s route in fact contribute 
to the experiences being called for?”
At some point in authoring your narrative or 
developing your storyboard or interpreting your 
storyboard into your final design you will wonder, 
“How can I be sure what design features, materials, spatial character, color pallets and more 
contribute to a particular emotional experience?” 
Over the years, first unconsciously and later consciously, working to understand and apply John 
Simonds’ epiphany found me developing the following exercise.
Looking back to my early days teaching landscape architecture, I obviously took Simonds’ 
epiphany to heart. I didn’t realize until years 
later the extent to which the idea of designing experiences appeared in my teaching and 
personal design projects. Simonds’ observation 
that we design experiences, not places, spaces, 
or things, dovetailed with my belief that even a 
first-semester design student from a small rural 
community could become a great designer if 
willing to question certain of their personal 
experiences and chase down the answers. In the 
following Emotion Matrix exercise, you challenge your ability to question personal experiences you’ve taken for granted and, as it were, 
dig out the answers. The Emotion Matrix is 
a step-by-step exercise. The worksheet looks 
like this.
Things
Senses
1. Identify and list
the things around
you.
2. Identify and list
each thing’s
dominant
characteristics.
3. Describe in as
much detail as
possible what each
of your senses was
experiencing for
each adjective
listed under #2. 
4. Identify objects
or landscape
features that
embody your
cumulative
adjectives
Nouns
Adjectives
Cumulative
Adjectives
Design Criteria
Sights
Slowly look about
your place and list
the things you saw
Sounds
List sounds you
were hearing, near
& further away
Touches
List what you were
touching and what
was touching you
Smells
List the smells,
aromas, odors
Tastes
If you were tasting
something, list the
tastes.
Figure 9.6 Emotion Matrix.
237
Steps to filling out the worksheet:
1.	Identify the emotional theme running through 
your design. Or, if there is a developmental progression to the users’ experiences, pick 
a point in your narrative that calls for your 
landscape users to have a particular emotional 
experience. In either case identify that emotional experience: wonder, contemplation, 
playfulness, curiosity, contemplation. Note it 
on the line at the top of the worksheet.
2.	Find a quiet place. I typically bring a pad of 
paper, pencil, and recorder. I jot down main 
ideas and talk out details. Don’t worry about 
taking out loud. Put an ear bud in your ear and 
people will assume you’re on the phone.
3.	Take a deep breath, close your eyes, and relax 
for a moment. When you are calm, think back 
to a moment when you were totally immersed 
in the emotion you identified. Take your time. 
Eyes still closed, slowly look around your 
mental image. Picture what you were doing; 
where you were? Talk through this so your 
recorder gets the things you saw and with 
which your senses interacted.
4.	Work down column #1 entitled “Identify and 
list the things around you.” This is the easiest 
of the columns to fill in. As your mind’s eye 
slowly looks around the place you related to 
your selected emotion, identify (in bullet 
form) those things to which each of your 
senses reacted. What things do you see: sand, 
waves, high arching pine trees? Hear: waves 
hitting the beach; wave sounds punctuated by 
gull squawks, sounds of approaching footsteps 
on sand? Touch: bare foot or sandals; breeze on 
face etc….you get the idea. Again, really take 
your time and work to see, feel, smell, touch, 
and taste it all.
5.	Work down column #2 entitled “Identify 
and list their dominant characteristics.” For 
each bulleted item identified in the previous 
column, work to identify what it is “saying” to 
each of your senses. There are numerous websites that list the words we have for variations 
in things we see, touch, taste, smell, and hear. 
One such site prepared by Jacqui Murry lists 
words related to sounds. See those at https://
worddreams.wordpress.com/2015/04/06/118ways-to-describe-sound/
Hers is an interesting website for authors 
searching to include sounds in their writing. 
Murry provides numerous ways for authors to 
describe sounds. Her list is extensive and very 
helpful in imagining particular kinds of sounds in 
particular settings. Qualities of sounds not explicitly considered as you go down her list include 
“direction,” “proximity,” and “coverage,” whether 
the sound is uni- or omnidirectional (focused 
or all encompassing). As landscape architectural 
designers, working in the four-dimensional 
world, these are critical considerations.
Look carefully at what your mind’s eye saw. 
You’ll be surprised at the detail that surfaces. 
Consider waves. Waves are not all the same. 
Some are lapping, some are crashing, and 
some roll up onto a beach and never break. 
Waves’ shapes are different; speed and rhythm 
are different; coloration from crest to trough; 
highlights; and so on. As you likely already 
realize, filling in this column takes some time. 
It is worth the time. With practice the act of 
mining your images for more and more detail 
will become second nature as you become 
accustomed to seeing beyond an object and 
into the sensory details that make it what it is.
In fact before you start filling out The 
Emotion Matrix, it is worth taking time 
to mine your elementary school memories 
regarding each of your five senses. Okay, make 
it six, include the haptic sense. Touch or tactile 
is a great example of what you likely took for 
granted when you were immersed in your 
Figure 9.7 Sensory receptors in the skin. Shutterstock Contributor: Designua.
238
emotional-experience place. Tactile sensations 
include weight/pressure (light, heavy), texture 
(smooth, gritty), vibration/rhythm (free, longitudinal, transverse, dampening), temperature (cold, cool, warm, hot), and more. As 
you bring these sensations to mind you’ll likely 
identify more of what made up your selected 
emotional experience. We rarely consider the 
sensations across our seated butt but we still 
frequently change our seated position and 
posture to improve our sense of comfort.
6.	Now start down column #3. In as much detail as 
possible, describe what each of your senses experienced. This is the most difficult of the columns to 
fill out. Doing it causes you to truly understand 
what registers with each of your senses in regard 
to a specific emotion. With that recognition you 
are learning to identify what turns a good design 
into a great design. Your experiences are a composition of most or all of your senses.
As we noted, lapping waves are distinct from 
crashing waves. Rate of speed, color gradients 
from bottom to top of the curl of the wave. 
Shape and density of highlights along curve 
from trough to crest. Sound, can you comfortably talk over it, or do you have to yell? What is 
the quality of the actual sound – flute like, bass 
drum, tambourine, or xylophone? Identify what 
you see, I mean really see, in a wave rising up, 
cresting and breaking. What are the colors, their 
shapes, rate of change, motion? Then consider 
the balloons at a poker party, the squeaking, and 
kinds of motion, effervescence of a soda or a beer 
being opened. The detailed descriptors that we 
associate with waves, balloons, and effervescence 
are surprisingly similar.
An excellent example of “seeing” detail in 
water and waves is found in Frederic Edwin 
Church’s oil painting of Niagara (1857). If you 
get a chance to see his painting, up close, look 
at the detail along the bottom of the painting. 
You will see extremely realistic rocks below the 
surface of the water. You will see the result of 
the kind of understanding of detail that makes 
a good painting a masterpiece.
Once you have a list in column #3, look it 
over. Surprise! Surprise! What you actually have 
are the sensual criteria with which to guide the 
design of your selected experiential setting. The 
array of sensual characteristics are actually the 
criteria found in many situations that contribute to your selected emotional experience.
7.	In the last column, 4, “Identify objects or 
landscape features that embody your cumulative adjectives.” Consider each grouping of 
criteria you identified in the previous column. 
Now identify the objects in which they would 
be found or from which they would emanate. 
Work one sensual group at a time. How many 
landscape features and qualities does each 
Figure 9.8 Frederic Edwin Church’s 1857 painting Niagara measures 3.3′ tall by 7.5′ wide. Courtesy 
National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
239
grouping bring to mind? The effervescence 
heard when slowly opening a can of pop comes 
close to the rustling sound of quaking aspen 
in a light breeze. The sparkling highlights of 
lapping waves could be found in slow moving 
mobile, shimmering silver maple, or banners 
hung from light posts. Each contributes similar 
sensations at different costs. If you’d like a somewhat different explanation for this approach, see 
“Fluency and Flexibility in Thinking” in Adams’ 
Conceptual Blockbusting (1976, 79–82).
At this point you have a palette of landscape 
items and the necessary characteristics and qualities to consider inserting, to some extent, into 
your text and definitely into your storyboard 
sketches, accompanying descriptors, and then 
your final design. Another way to think of this is 
that you now have a variety of landscape features 
from which to choose objects, features, spaces 
and spatial sequences, materials, and more that 
can make up your proposed design. This is a lot 
stronger reasoning for design decisions than the 
usual egocentric “I wanted,” “I liked,” “I decided.”
Out of numerous workshops aimed at identifying the criteria for “Gaiety” my favorite response 
came from a rather outspoken imposing undergraduate who announced his recalled place experience 
was the Friday-night fraternity basement poker 
party. He was the kind of person who liked to stir 
things up. Everyone else had settled on places like 
early morning foggy beach, most favorite birthday 
party, mountain top vista looking over snow-capped 
range, sitting under a favorite tree or next to a clear 
stream. I surprised him when I said, “Okay, let’s go 
with it and see what happens.” What was most interesting, believe it or not, was that most of the students’ final lists of criteria for sensual characteristics 
drawn from each of their identified memory places 
were very similar to his Friday night poker party. We 
learned that “Gaiety” found in seemingly diverse 
places in fact was often generated by very similar 
environmental sensations. Is this only indicative of 
Anglo-American and European cultures? In some 
instances, probably. In most instances they are probably cross-cultural. Either way, working in a foreign 
culture you could interview people or ask them 
to bring pictures that express the emotions you’re 
working to unpack and work through The Emotion 
Matrix above.
Okay, time to take a break. Asking you to 
identify and describe things you’ve long taken for 
granted can be an exhausting exercise. Some of 
you, I’ll bet, are even frustrated. Hell, you’ve likely 
never been this meticulous in considering your 
surroundings. That is the downside of becoming 
a designer. You can no longer take your surroundings for granted. Please stick with this, even the 
simplest list for each sense and each subsequent 
column is a start. It will pay huge dividends to 
the designer you are becoming. Believe me you 
will get better each time and eventually do this 
automatically.
HOW DOES A LANDSCAPE 
NARRATIVE UNFOLD?
Here is another taken-for-granted moment. 
Consider how landscape narratives unfold as you 
move through your day. Remember earlier, there 
are times when messages are delivered opposite to 
what would be expected. Coming over the top of a 
hill or knoll, what’s in the distance appears before 
what is closer to you. Walking toward a thirdfloor railing on a deck the tops of trees appear 
first, then the body of the trees, then trunk, and 
then how the tree is set into the ground.
Gibson’s diagram, Ecological Approach to Visual 
Perception (1979, 199), provides an excellent 
example of how, in one environmental configuration, a narrative unfolds for the reader. Given movement through spaces, from one to another, rising or 
dropping with changes in elevation, the narrative 
sequence is not always all that straightforward.
In the sequential volumetric spaces one 
encounters when moving toward, into, across, 
and out of an environment there is the potential 
of transitioning in one or more of six directions: 
up/down, forward/backward, left/right. With 
these transitioning directional motions a narrative can be choreographed and become evident 
in a number of interesting ways. Unimpeded 
movement straight ahead can have you encounter 
larger to smaller, or smaller to larger spaces. The 
spaces may get wider or narrower and in doing 
240
so go from brighter to darker due to shadows 
along with accompanying acoustical and temperature changes. Objects and spaces come into view 
and, in a sense, as we move forward toward them. 
They get larger. These are the qualities that can 
comprise your landscape narrative and be refined 
frame by frame in your storyboard.
In moving to the right more of what is ahead 
of me comes into my cone of vision from the right 
while what is there moves out of my sight to the 
left. If I move to the left, the appearance and disappearance of what, in a manner of speaking, is 
coming toward me is reversed.
I find moving right or left around objects at 
or higher than eye level or up and over crests of 
hills or down into channels or valleys to provide 
for more interesting narratives. The sequencing of 
what comes into view will challenge your creativity but the landscape’s end users’ experience will 
be added to by their choregraphed movements.
The sequential delivery of narrative statements 
as you move toward the crest of a hill or top 
Figure 9.9 The ecological approach to visual perception. Gibson (1979, 199).  
Courtesy of Taylor & Francis Publishers.
Figure 9.10 Message delivery when moving 
toward a hillside. Drawn by author.
241
landing of a stairway as you read in Chapter 5 
regarding the stairway at the design firm of Sasaki, 
Dawson, DeMay moves from the top down.
Years ago I worked to provide a narrative that 
visitors would experience as they turned the corner 
from a hallway into a dining room, then moved 
across the dining room to a porch two stories 
above the condo’s backyard. As they moved across 
the dining room to and then through a sliding 
glass door their view was out over a porch rail to 
the yard below. The goal was to subtly connect the 
interior and exterior spaces. As you approached 
the porch’s railing two stories above the backyard 
the sequence of what came into view was the tree 
tops at the far end of the backyard, then the body 
of the trees, then the trunks, and then the ground. 
A few steps closer to the porch rail and the back of 
the yard came into view first and then the middle 
of the yard came into view. Reach the rail and 
lean on it and then almost all of what is below 
came into view. There is, in this case, your narrative sequence: top to bottom, distant to in close 
to closest. Not the usual, or expected sequence of 
messages but one to be taken advantage of.
Now take a first run at translating your written 
narrative into your storyboard. Take the same 
approach you did with your written narrative. 
Remember Anne Lamott’s approach to “shitty 
first drafts”: of just getting it down (no one is 
going to see it), fixing it up, then “the dental draft, 
where you check every tooth” (Lamott, 1994, 26). 
Even the dental draft doesn’t have to be all that 
pain staking, you are still going to share your storyboard with peers or friends who will help you to 
tighten it up considerably.
YOU’RE ON FINAL 
APPROACH
When you have what you feel is a good draft of your 
storyboard get your friends or work cohorts back 
together. See that they each have a draft of your 
newest narrative. With all your sketches pinned 
up on a wall or cardboard panels, or PowerPoint, 
walk everyone, sketch by sketch, through your storyboard. Ask them to help as they did with your 
narrative: pointing out what needs clarification, 
relocation, removal, addition, and filling in with 
more or less detail. Let the ensuing discussion 
determine how the storyboard sketches are to be 
rearranged, tossed out, added to with visuals and 
written directions: a distant view here, an aroma 
there, a change in the sound underfoot. As a test of 
completeness, this would be an excellent point to 
make a presentation to all concerned: clients and a 
sample of likely people who would visit the design. 
Given your previous presentations, before the 
­narrative-storyboard-design approach, you may be 
surprised by people’s, especially your clients’, reactions to this presentation.
Remember, your presentation of your design, 
in storyboard form, will be through the eyes and 
thoughts of someone participating in the design. It 
will be an eye-level, personal experience. What you 
present is much more easily identified with than if it 
was described using spatial and geometric nomenclature. When sculptor-painter Ken Spiering and I 
demonstrated our combined narrative-storyboard 
presentation of the healing garden to the Sisters 
of Providence and hospital administrators and 
staff their reaction took us totally by surprise. A 
number of them started crying. When I realized 
people were crying I got scared. I’d never experienced anything like that before. Slowly, I began to 
realize what was happening. The presentation was 
not the usual description of what people could see 
in plan view. It was not the language of geometry 
delivered with the assumption that everyone would 
be on the same page regarding emotions and experiences derived from what was seen in the geometry 
in plan view. Our presentation was on the ground 
and personal and the folks around the table felt it. 
This was when I learned the power of a first- or 
second-person narrative approach to design. Our 
presentation was at eye level, easily identified with, 
and delivered through the client’s intended users’ 
experiences. What we orally and graphically presented was what they hoped their eventual garden 
would be to those who visited it, what it would 
bring into people’s lives, and as Sister Bernadette 
had asked, to provide, a balance to the technological side of health care.
To this point in Landscape Architecture as 
Storytelling my focus has been on the value of 
a narrative approach to design that benefits the 
242
designer, that makes learning design easier, and 
that results in a design process more readily understood by your clients. What’s ironic is that prior to 
developing The Analogy I’d been doing what I’d 
been trained to do, focusing on things. In working 
on The Analogy I realized that interacting with 
the client through narrative was a sensitive and 
very personal variation of Simonds’ goal to design 
for experiences first and let the places, spaces, and 
things grow out of the called for experiences.
As said above, “you may be surprised by 
people’s reactions” the first time you make a 
­narrative-storyboard presentation. Now, let’s 
start interpreting your storyboard into a design. 
Whether you are developing a project of your 
choosing or the Healing Garden project, it is time 
to take a run at it.
TURNING YOUR NARRATIVESTORYBOARD INTO A 
DESIGN
We all know there are various ways to approach 
a design’s development. The narrative-­storyboarddesign approach is one more which, hopefully, 
you’ll find value in and come to adopt. The 
­narrative-storyboard-design approach to site 
design moves you from general issues, questions, concerns to increasingly specific questions, 
answers, and design decisions. Given the generalto-­specific flow of the narrative-storyboard-design 
process, I see three possible approaches to interpreting your storyboard into your final design: 
first, move directly from storyboard to design in 
your existing site; second, turn your storyboard 
into a concept diagram without a strict reference 
(an overlay) to your site; or third, lay trace paper 
over your site’s base plan and massage your storyboard into a concept diagram. Personally, I go 
with the second approach and develop a concept 
diagram first.
Understanding a general-to-specific approach 
to design decision-making highlights two 
reasons to move from storyboard to concept 
diagram before detailed design. First, you avoid 
the confusion that comes with mixing general 
questions and answers with more specific ones. 
Second, concept diagrams deal with relationships and not things. This fact relates back to 
working from general, fundamental, to specific, 
detailed. It is not unusual, especially for newcomers to design, to find themselves struggling 
with questions requiring detailed answers while 
they still haven’t answered the broader general 
ones. Trying to determine the detailed design of 
a bench seat when you haven’t an idea what the 
seat, given the design’s theme, might look like, or 
maybe even exactly where it is to be placed contributes to a lot of unnecessary confusion. This 
isn’t all that ridiculous. Many times, I’ve sat with 
a student or team of students only to hear them 
simultaneously struggling to answer both general 
and detailed questions. Adopting a narrative-­
storyboard-design sequential approach helps alleviate that problem, or at least minimize it. Its very 
nature is that of a decision-making process that 
moves from broad to increasingly more detailed 
­decisions.
In an effort to reduce struggling with a variety 
of questions/answers along the general to specific 
spectrum, I like to go from storyboard to fairly 
detailed concept diagram, to refined concept 
diagram, to a schematic as applied to the site and 
its surroundings. Some of you will likely work to 
interpret your storyboard directly into your site. 
And, some of you may be able to do it, most 
likely those of you who have been doing design 
for a few years and are now testing the narrative-­
storyboard-design approach. The temptation here 
is to assume you have a handle on your storyboard 
and to focus on doing the design. If that is the 
case, I ask that as you develop your design, most 
likely working to organize activity areas and circulation patterns, frequently looping back to your 
storyboard. Trust in it. You’ve done a lot of valuable self-reflection to identify and express your 
design’s users’ experiences, emotions, and expectations in the making of your storyboard. Don’t 
ignore all that now. You’ll find that this work will 
also pay off when you present your narrative-storyboard to your client(s).
A last thought on the usefulness of concept diagrams is that when done, with or without the site 
plan, you have the activities, circulation, enclosure and openness, and spatial character’s interre243
lationships set. The beauty of a concept diagram is 
that it expresses relationships more than things. It 
can be massaged, squeezed here, elongated there, 
and continue to maintain its original relations 
between areas varying activities.
In referring to your storyboard, many of you 
will likely realize your narrative’s character(s) 
encountered vertical features that directed their 
movement and vision and overhead features that 
provided stronger or lesser enclosure. While plan 
view concept diagrams are common to design, 
vertical concept diagrams are less so. However, 
your storyboard sketches have given you a head 
start in visualizing vertical and overhead planes. 
Doing both helps you develop your design. 
Done well, the result can literally be considered 
an experiential choreography from which, as you 
add more and more detail from your storyboard, 
becomes a human choreography. After all, life is a 
dance and if choreographed well, your site design 
will, along with your users’ experiences, whatever 
the theme, flow well, flow smoothly.
If you haven’t already, now is the time to have 
your base plan ready to help you understand the 
site’s ecological, social, and legal opportunities 
and constraints. “A site design deals with three 
elements: the pattern of activity, the pattern of 
circulation, and the pattern of sensible form that 
supports them” (Lynch and Hack, 1989, 127). 
Don’t be constrained, think beyond the property 
boundaries. Hopefully your narrative started with 
your site visitors’ first impression somewhere at 
a distance from your site. Don’t hesitate, even 
though it is not within your site’s boundaries, to 
include this environment in your design. There 
will be opportunities to work with the client, 
surrounding landowners, and local authorities 
to include your “first-impression” zone in your 
design proposal. Nothing lost by trying.
As you move back and forth between storyboard and concept diagram, you bring greater 
detail to your diagraming. In addition to greater 
detail, as derived from your storyboard, a schematic brings scale into play. As you refine your 
horizontal, vertical, and sequential relationships, 
you close in on the need to determine the scale 
of spaces, their dimensions, and the materials 
and the finishes making them up. Your schematic 
begins to capture both the explicit and the more 
subtle site qualities contributing to your narrative 
character’s experiences.
Sitte (1945), Lynch (1960; 1971), Cullen 
(1961), Ashihara (1970), Bacon (1974), Arnold 
(1991), and more deal with scale, particularly what 
is referred to as human scale, in terms of both relative sizes and ratios of height of objects or plant 
masses to distance from viewer. “Scale is not size, it 
is the inherent claim to size that the construction 
makes to the eye” (Cullen, 1961, 79).
The concept of scale, captured in Ashihara’s use 
of the word “feel,” is related to human scale or 
relative size of an object or a space to people, typically an average-sized adult. In the following, “D” 
refers to distance; “H” refers to height. 
According to my observation 
D/H=1 is the critical point at 
which the quality of exterior 
space radically changes. In 
other words, if D/H becomes 
larger than 1, we feel that the 
distance between buildings 
Figure 9.11 Message delivery when moving 
toward a hill’s crest. Drawn by author.
244
become rather great, while if 
D/H becomes smaller than 1, 
then we feel that the distances 
become rather small. When 
D/H becomes equal to 1, then, 
we feel a balance between 
building height and the space 
between buildings.
(Ashihara, 1970, 43)
Creating a horizontal enclosure 
with trees is different from 
using architectural building 
materials. Unlike the solid 
enclosure of a building…
when viewing a space 
from the ground, there is a 
feeling of enclosure when the 
surroundings are tall enough 
to intercept our entire cone 
of vision. A convenient rule 
of thumb is that the observer 
should not be further away 
from the defining edge than 
three times the enclosure height. 
The vertical definition of space 
with trees is important…
the ever-changing translucent 
canopy of leaves and branches 
allows for a simultaneous 
experience of the smaller space 
within the larger volume. 
In this sense, trees are more 
valuable than a building 
arcade for reducing the 
overwhelming scale of large 
structures.
(Arnold, 1991, 59)
“The practice of using trees to make urban spaces 
is, in its most advanced form, inspiring. Urban 
trees are powerful symbols. Like words, they 
can be organized to create confusion or poetry” 
(Arnold, 1991, 47). “Trees organize spaces in two 
distinctly different ways – horizontally and vertically. Horizontally, they do it by visually enclosing, completing, or defining an area of open 
space. Vertically they define space by creating an 
airy ceiling of branches” (Arnold, 1991, 59).
Continue to refer back and forth between your 
narrative and storyboard, drawing by drawing, 
locate your design’s participant in your site, think 
through what would ideally make up each space, 
each transition between activity areas: underfoot, 
overhead, up ahead, peeking around a corner; 
Figure 9.12 Defining urban open space with 
trees as edge (Arnold, 1991, 59). Courtesy 
Wiley Publishers.
245
sight, sound, touch, smell, and taste. Bring in 
what you determined best contributes to the site 
visitor’s experiences. This again is developing the 
choreography mentioned earlier. What I find 
interesting is that the storyboard deals more with 
your site visitors’ choreography while the design 
captures more the opportunity for orchestration: 
rhythm, tempo, harmony in overlapping sounds, 
and more.
In your experiential exercise, think about 
the qualities of the sounds your narrative called 
for then think about the things that provided 
those sounds. Consider where and when those 
sounds can be reflected or absorbed. Gravel 
underfoot, gravel mixed with moss. Overhead 
a dense foliage for maximum sound absorption 
(but also heavy shade) or a less dense foliage 
with reduced sound absorption and lighter 
shade. Give consideration to what those selections mean for fall and winter. Think back to 
Arnold’s observation regarding honey locust. 
Its sparse branching structure provides light 
summer shade and after losing its leaves the 
tree nearly disappears in winter. The idea that 
the honey locust almost disappears because of 
its sparse branching structure means more sunlight during the colder months. These are the 
kinds of natural changes that come with landscape architecture’s primary medium, plants 
that benefit from having been considered for 
how they change from season to season.
VARIOUS DESIGN 
PROCESSES
As we noted back in Chapter 7 along with Figure 
7.15, Design Process Sampler, there are all sorts 
of variations on what makes for a design process. 
Even so, they do have some commonalities. There 
is always a problem to be solved or an issue to 
be dealt with. There are various forms of inventory, analysis, idea generation, and evaluation of 
those ideas. However, as Motloch notes, “In rare 
instances, the characteristics occur consciously as 
discrete entities. More often they occur intuitively 
and without apparent organization” (Motloch, 
1991, 239).
Design processes are not linear 
in character nor definite in 
length. Rather, they are cyclical 
and ongoing. They have no 
predetermined beginning; 
the designer may enter by 
observing a problem, by having 
an idea, by physically creating 
something, or by evaluating 
some given situation.
(Motloch, 1991, 239)
However executed the process remains goal oriented. I like Motloch’s summation that “Herein 
lie the frustration and excitement of design” 
(239). But the goal is usually modified again and 
again right to the end. Design is a learning process 
all the way up to and through construction. That 
is why after all the modifications are made and 
noted on the respective drawings and the last 
shovel and frontend loader has left the site all the 
drawings are stamped AS BUILT.
There is really no reason to try to walk you 
through turning your storyboard into a design. 
At this point, given a fairly tight storyboard, I’m 
confident you will soon want more wall space or 
more corkboard or foamcore.
CLOSING THOUGHTS 
ON THE BENEFITS OF A 
NARRATIVE-STORYBOARDDESIGN APPROACH
Although I’ve mentioned this a few times it is 
worth restating the magnitude of John Simonds’ 
aha moment when he discovered within his background as a landscape architect, that what counts 
as design is that “one plans not places, spaces 
or things – one plans experiences” (1961, 225). 
Simonds’ epiphany is the foundation of a narrative approach. And, you know well by now, by 
“narrative approach” I do not mean a description 
246
of the physical environment, that would still 
bring into play assumptions of what’s good, what 
works, and what fits. By “narrative approach” I 
mean through the mind’s eye first- or second-­
person experiential expression of what will come 
to make up your design. So, what comes with 
believing in and practicing, an experience-based 
narrative approach to developing a design?
Simonds’ homage to Corbusier: 
“For he perhaps of all 
contemporary planners can, 
in the simplest diagram, most 
powerfully grip the mind and 
kindle the imagination. He 
thinks, I could now see, not 
primarily in terms of lines and 
masses, but rather in terms 
of impacts. He designs and 
shapes and arranges human 
experiences.”
(1961, 225)
There are benefits that come with each phase of 
a more traditional design process. Just the same, 
what The Analogy’s narrative-storyboard-design 
process has you do is reorder the sequence to allow 
you to take better advantage of those benefits. 
Plan view is a critical tool of our profession, an 
important part of your design process, but toward 
the end of the design process, not the beginning. 
What I mean here is that a design seen in plan 
view allows spatial, structural, and horizontal 
relationships to be seen and discussed. Elevations 
and cross sections provide for horizontal and vertical relations to be considered. An overall plan 
view aids in understanding how an existing and 
eventually proposed site fits into the fabric of its 
surroundings. The end product says your client 
cares about where the site is located with regard 
to its surroundings, who her neighbors are, and 
how they live, work, and play around the site. All 
these plan-view benefits are best realized toward 
the end of the design process, having already 
determined shape, form, color palette, character, 
and more from your empathically arrived at users’ 
experiential expectations. In other words, the 
­narrative-storyboard-design process starts with 
why a design, as it will be designed, exists, from 
a user’s perspective, not the designer’s perspective. The narrative process functions to provide 
a developmental progression of particular experiences, in particular locations, and in particular 
sequences. Those experiences as drawn in your 
storyboard will help determine the length, width, 
and height dimensions of the volumetric spaces 
and their defining objects.
After you’ve written your first 
drafts, you begin to revise, 
making critical judgments about 
what you’ve written, decisions 
made in part upon which word 
goes best in which position, about 
the appropriateness of a figure of 
speech, about the use of grammar 
and punctuation, and about 
how your writing may affect an 
imagined reader. Revision, and 
I mean extensive revision, is the 
key to transforming a mediocre 
poem into a work that can touch 
and even alter a reader’s heart.
(Kooser, 2005, 16)
Starting your design process with a narrative 
brings forth four benefits. First, the act of writing 
brings with it the need to selectively start your 
narrative, to thoughtfully pick that first word. It 
could be your character’s state of mind, or her first 
impression of the site. Either way you are taking 
time to put thought into a process that has you 
considering what words to use that best capture 
your character’s attitude, expectations, place, and 
progression. In that you make conscious ­decisions 
247
to use one word over another, you initiate a 
thoughtful, experience-based process regarding 
approach, arrival at, entry into, and movement 
around and through the site design. Even when 
you start by allowing your characters to determine 
how your written narrative starts, that requires a 
focused selection of words and sentences. That 
selection process is further refined when it comes 
to reflecting your narrative off the visuals making 
up your storyboard. One side note in regard to 
clarity in writing is, to the best of your ability, 
never start a sentence with a pronoun, especially 
“it.” You will be amazed as to how much clearer 
your writing will be and as a result your visuals.
Second is the fact that your design is based on 
and grows out of people’s experiences. To a great 
extent they are not assumptions on your part. 
You’ve encountered many situations throughout 
your life that are similar to those you will design. 
If not, if you find yourself dealing with a situation 
with which you are not familiar, then it is time 
for research or bringing in a paid specialist. With 
a first- or second-person narrative as the starting 
point of your design, what makes up your emerging landscape, architectural, or interior design is 
prompted not through assumptions but through 
empathy; your ability to recall similar experiences, 
and the character of those places giving rise to 
those experiences. As a result, your skill at sharing 
the feelings and behaviors of your narrative’s characters greatly helps determine the spaces, places, 
and things that come to be your design. You are 
building an experiential foundation on which the 
sustainability of your design is likely perpetuaterd 
through people’s everyday routines.
Third, accepting various authors and poets’ 
call to allow your narrative’s characters to show 
you the design, their actions and reactions illuminate those sensory triggers to be included in 
your design.
Allowed to enjoy your design, your characters’ 
participation helps you identify the, all too often 
taken-for-granted, sensory triggers that make a 
place memorable. Almost like reverse engineering, your sensitivity to your characters allows you 
to see, smell, touch, hear, and maybe even taste 
the things and spaces that make up your design’s 
physical qualities. In this way the increasingly 
more detailed design decisions are put off till 
later, when they are more easily addressed. Many 
of your characters’ sensations are of things not 
usually seen in a plan view.
A fourth benefit comes with your narrative- 
based discussions with your client that revolve 
around your characters and the spaces, places and 
things they experience. You no longer state design 
decisions as having come from you. You may go 
through an entire presentation of your narrative 
and never be asked, “Why did you do…?” or 
“Why did you decide (or worse, feel) this belonged 
here?” Working through your narrative removes 
those so often heard statements on your part: 
“I wanted,” “I decided,” “I liked,” and “I felt.” 
Instead, the discussion revolves around your characters or, more typically, your characters’ experiences. What you are doing is stimulating your 
client’s ability to empathize with someone participating in what will be their design. Questions 
directed at why particular objects, spaces, materials, etc. are in the design remove you from the 
hot seat. Your answers can be drawn from The 
Emotion Matrix, relating experiences, emotions, 
and expectations to past similar encounters with 
which your client probably identifies. You could 
reference related studies. You may even involve 
the client by asking them, “Do you remember the 
last time you felt _____? I’d bet this or that was 
reaching out to you and interacting with this or 
that sense.”
The four benefits give you a strong head start 
on what makes up your design, and what makes it 
what it will become.
I haven’t tried this, but I see no reason why 
you shouldn’t make a presentation to your client 
of just your narrative, or narratives, without the 
storyboard. Yes, you may author more than one 
narrative of people experiencing your emerging 
design in different seasons, early morning and 
later in the evening, as youngsters and as adults. 
Your character gets to comment to him or herself, 
“I have to come back here tonight and see if….” 
Making a presentation earlier in the process 
without the storyboard will help with making 
corrections earlier rather than later, and better 
guarantee your narrative’s characters (yes, I know 
it is really you) correctly grasp the client’s wishes.
248
While it may seem I’ve spent more time on 
writing, on word selection, than storyboarding, I may have. I’ve long felt that the better 
a designer can write, can narrate her design as 
experienced, then the better that designer can 
see her design. As a result, moving from written 
narrative to visual storyboard is made all the 
easier. This is an arduous task but so was doing 
design in your first studio. Remember Kooser’s 
thought on the creativity in writing poetry: “It 
is impossible to achieve perfection, but any 
poem will be more effective if it falls just a little 
short of perfection rather than a long way short” 
(Kooser, 2005, 120). 
10
Ethics in Landscape 
Architectural Design 
Practice
E
thics in the practice of landscape architecture concerned me for 50 years. There was 
always a niggling feeling that in our concern 
for the environment, although we talked about 
people, about those who would use our designs, 
those who got left with our designs, what we did 
wasn’t enough. My feelings finally got put into 
words as I struggled to nail down what it meant 
for me as a landscape architect to claim to be a 
steward of the land (Scarfo, 1988), to teach landscape architecture (Scarfo, 1987; 1989), and to 
clarify if what I say as an environmental designer 
working in the service of others actually shows up 
in what I do (Scarfo, 1992).
The received wisdom of today 
belongs more and more to 
experts who hold their licenses 
without ever having asked 
themselves or having been 
asked whether immediate 
experience with the subject at 
hand might in any particular 
way be relevant to their 
qualifications.
Murry Kempton, (Gratz, 
1989, 15)
The ethics of the individual 
architect were replaced by the 
ethics of the architectural office, 
and the more the architectural 
office resembled businesses in 
general, the more did its ethics 
resemble those of the business 
world.
(Boyle, 1977, 342)
Over the years, as I worked on Landscape 
Architecture as Storytelling, I thought I had put 
aside ethics and the practice of landscape architecture; I thought I had replaced it with my desire 
to better understand how to develop, consistently 
develop, really good landscape designs. As luck had 
it, the more I explored John Simonds’ belief that 
we design experiences and not places, spaces, and 
things I realized that people came first. As landscape architects, people were our main concern. 
Plants, ecology, topography, soil mechanics, laws 
and regulations, and business practices were all 
important areas of knowledge, practiced through 
their respective skill sets in support of those for 
whom we practice our profession. But, when we 
put people first, when we approach design as a 
stage on which people experience life as a wonder, 
we more readily realize the other areas of study 
are employed in support of people’s experiences, 
in support of satisfying their expectations as they 
move about the outdoors. The more I thought of 
this the more I remembered the limited attention 
my profession gave people as an ethical concern 
and wondered if it had changed.
BACKGROUND: HOW WE 
GOT HERE
If we are to design psychologically 
healthy urban settings rather 
than confusing alienating 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003286981-11
251
252
ones, we must understand the 
individual as an instrument 
for decoding information, 
imparting meaning, and 
emotionally responding to 
settings. We must also understand 
settings as physical entities with 
encoded meanings that are read 
phenomenally as wholes, rather 
than as aggregates of pieces.
(Motloch, 1991, 278)
Walking the boardwalk along the Chesapeake Bay 
at the Aspen Wye Institute one morning I met and 
struck up a conversation with a woman also enjoying the early morning quiet along the edge of the 
bay. When she found out I was a designer, she shared 
a personal story. She and her husband had recently 
contracted an architect to remodel their kitchen. 
Three times they shared their ideas with the designer 
only to be disappointed each time with what they 
were given. “He wasn’t listening to us. What we 
were seeing wasn’t what we were asking for.” As she 
described it, the third presentation/discussion was 
terminated with her looking the designer in the eye, 
pointing to her lips, and saying “Read my lips. You’re 
fired.”
Was the designer exercising his ethical responsibilities in not providing the clients with what they 
asked for? I would say “no.” Yet, at the same time, 
I’m sure the designer was not being malicious. I’m 
sure the designer was doing basically what he had 
been taught to do. Just as I am sure the designer was 
being sincere in his efforts to provide the client the 
best design possible. Still, the bottom line remains. 
In ignoring his clients’ experiential goals he was not 
exercising an ethical approach to their wishes. For 
these reasons I want to speak to an area of ethical 
practice that does concern the public, not just its 
health, safety, and welfare, but the public’s daily, 
experiential lives and emotional well-being.
Being recognized as a steward of the land used 
to rest on an individual’s ability to work on the 
land, know its needs and those of its animals and 
plants. That was a necessity in order to provide 
sustenance for one’s family. Over the years, from 
700 AD to about the 1800s, the stewards, or later 
yeoman farmers, became increasingly recognized 
for the academic degrees they earned more than 
their personal experience with flora and fauna, 
soil and weather (Scarfo, 1988; 1989; 1989a). 
Today we graduate well-educated landscape 
architectural designers, some of whom have never 
planted a tree.
My sense is that two social forces, both from 
within the still emerging profession of landscape 
architecture, contributed to the self-avowed stewards of the land being separated from the very 
thing they claimed to serve. One driving force was 
the effort to be recognized as a profession (Larson, 
1977). This is what social scientists today see as 
one of the steps in the professionalization process 
(Vernon, 1987, 13). That effort, becoming a recognized professional within a government-accepted 
profession, requires the popular and legislative 
support of the public. With legislative approval 
a professional association may exercise the 
powers of self-evaluation, such as exercised by the 
Council of Landscape Architectural Registration 
Boards (CLARB) and delivered through the 
Landscape Architect Registration Examination 
(LARE). The parent association, the American 
Society of Landscape Architects (ASLA), may also 
exercise self-control and “become almost immune 
to external regulation. The fact remains, however, 
that their privileges can be lost” (Larson, 1977, 
xii). Most ASLA state chapter associations have 
confronted sunsetting: the potential withdrawal 
of public support resulting in the loss of professional licensure.
The other social force separating landscape 
architects from the world they design is the 
profession’s desire to be accepted more for the 
sciences and technologies it employs than a 
social-psychological awareness of their design participants’ experiences. From the very beginning, 
the founders of the ASLA noted two purposes for 
the professional society. 
The constitutional statement 
of the goals of the Society 
253
[were]…1) to promote 
fellowship among the members, 
and 2) to increase the 
‘efficiency’ (i.e., the technical 
expertise) of the profession. The 
members made no mention 
in the goals of service to the 
public.
(Vernon, 1987, 14)
Reinforcing the lack of attention given those they 
serve, even before focusing on the science and 
technology applied through professional practitioners’ skills, the Society’s concern for honorable 
business practices saw the development of ethical 
codes “ostensibly for the benefit of the client…
their primary purpose is the protection of the 
practitioner” (Vernon, 1987, 14).
Over the years my approach to landscape architectural design shifted from thinking mostly in plan 
view to seeing designs through the user’s experiential 
views at eye level. The shift was from objects and 
spaces as objects along with the assumption I knew 
what those things meant to a design’s participants 
to letting the users’ expected experiences guide my 
design’s development. Unexpectedly, for me, that 
shift brought with it a growing ethical awakening, 
not one found in the American Society of Landscape 
Architect’s (ASLA) Code of Professional Ethics. To 
this end I take this closing chapter to discuss designers’ ethical responsibilities not as businessmen and 
women, not as ecologically responsible designers 
and planners, but as the designers of people’s lifeworlds, of those places that exist in support of people’s daily routines, and, even more so, as supported 
by those daily routines.
BACKGROUND: THE 
EMERGING PROFESSIONAL 
SOCIETY
The first ‘Official Statement 
of Professional Practice: 
The Practice of Landscape 
Architecture,’ as published 
in 1911, consisted of three 
sections: Scope and Values, 
Methods of Practice, and 
Official Statement. Under 
‘Scope and Value,’ the authors 
described the work of the 
profession in three ways. First, 
landscape architecture was ‘the 
art of fitting land for human 
use and enjoyment’
(Vernon, 1987, 16)
rather than the other way around – the art of 
fitting human use and enjoyment to the land. 
Today, our ethical responsibilities are the culmination of what started in the 8th century with the 
introduction of the concept of stewardship and 
grew into a professional educational process in 
the early 20th century that separates landscape 
architects from the land and the people they claim 
to serve (Scarfo, 1988; 1992). In becoming recognized as a profession those same people took 
on the responsibility to determine what constitutes human use and enjoyment and then design 
landscapes that provided for them. In so doing, 
ever since then, the professional association has 
worked to formalize and sustain its decision-­
making authority.
While the 1911 “Statement” makes professional landscape architects responsible for their 
actions and interactions with their profession, 
their peers, clients, contractors, and the plants 
used in their designs their understanding of the 
recipient-users of their designs, those left to live 
with their designs day in and day out, remain 
“assumptions” behind their design and regulatory decisions. Section Two, “Methods and 
Practice,” outlined design process and generally 
understood products, e.g., park and playground 
design. The Third section dealt with the professional’s expected business behaviors. There was 
254
no mention of the reception of their designs on 
the part of the users. I have to imagine that what 
could be deemed an inward look on the part of a 
profession so concerned with financial and business ethics played a role in the fact that it still “did 
not garner the public visibility which landscape 
architects sought” (Vernon, 1987, 16).
As Vernon notes, the “1917 report of the 
Committee on Professional Practice and Ethics…
did not regulate the behavior of professionals 
toward their clients [or landscape users] so much 
as regulated the behavior of professionals toward 
other professionals” (17). This ethical responsibility to each other, and their clients was further 
elaborated upon and adopted in the 1927 Code 
of Professional Ethics. They did come to refer to 
“societal goals” which today are “public health, 
safety, and welfare” but still did not focus on 
designing for people’s particular experiences in 
particular places. Professional responsibilities of 
that nature are generalities left first to be interpreted by designers, then typically diminished by 
public regulations, and then even further diminished in public hearings.
Pretty safe to say there is little attention in 
the American Society of Landscape Architecture 
Code of Professional Ethics, Constitution, or 
Bylaws given those who live with the design 
and planning we do. Professional Ethics are all 
about business and public relations. My guess is 
that the assumption, of the profession’s leadership, although not stated, is that the Landscape 
Architectural Accreditation process sees to it 
that new designers’ education instills in them an 
ethical concern for those who live with and use 
their designs. But nowhere is it mentioned or are 
there expressed standards to be met.
As you’ll remember me saying earlier, when I 
was introduced to landscape architecture, I wondered what the formula was for good design. 
Today, the question would probably be, “Is our 
understanding of what constitutes the basis of 
good design evidence based and how do we arrive 
at it?” As we’ve found there are numerous case 
studies, a growing body of research, and publicly 
approved projects used as precedents of good 
design. Yet, other than the science and technology 
of site engineering and horticulture, researchers’ 
findings, and the legal regulations surrounding 
building codes and zoning regulations, the recognition of people and what constitutes good 
design is to a very great extent left to individual 
designers or teams of designers. Given the level at 
which design is explored, the findings and recommendations are given to rather than derived from 
those we as designers, not businesspeople, serve. A 
good example can be drawn from the Americans 
with Disabilities Act (ADA). Design guidelines 
drawn from the ADA assume to understand the 
needs of a particular social cohort. That understanding relates to function, physical capabilities, 
and access to and use of various environments 
but omits understanding individuals’ emotional 
states, their concerns, fears, and wishes (Rowles, 
1978; Rowe and Kahn, 1998) and how we, as 
landscape architects, can help improve the lives 
of the elderly, the infirm, the young, those with 
intellectual and developmental differences, and 
those considered active and healthy.
Such design guidelines as derived from the 
ADA and more would benefit greatly from the 
work of gerontologists and geographers, public 
health professionals, and epidemiologists. How 
would a landscape narrative differ for an active, 
middle-aged individual versus an elder relying on 
a walker and looking at the landscape ahead of 
them, while wondering if they did, in fact, take 
their morning medications or how far away a 
bathroom is? What kinds of concerns would each 
narrative express at the functional level (getting 
from here to there), at the social-cultural level 
(why doesn’t my community care about me?), and 
from the deeper, collective unconscious level (why 
am I being made to feel like an outsider?).
The world of designers’ assumptions can, 
to a great extent, be replaced with an approach 
based on first- and second-person narratives 
and a storyboarding of those narratives that give 
rise to designs. What is most interesting is that 
it wouldn’t be difficult to build a professional 
program around such an approach that meets 
the Landscape Architectural Accreditation Board 
(LAAB) accreditation process and in so doing 
turn what are now designs based primarily on 
assumptions and opinions into designs that grow 
out of identifiable and defensible facts.
255
Think back to your introduction to the healing 
garden in Chapter 8 and let’s consider a non-­
narrative approach to the healing garden’s design. 
Clients have been listened to. Objects have been, 
as they say, moved about on the surface of the 
earth until their arrangement looks good. In 
plan view the garden respects Sister Bernadette’s 
wishes. In elevations and perspective drawings the 
views are inviting, green and colorful. When all 
is said and done a garden has been designed. It 
is a visually pleasing environment. Your clients 
are happy with it, as it is seen in the drawings. It 
has plenty of seasonal color. Lots of greenery in 
contrast to its surrounding urban, concrete, and 
brick setting. There are benches to sit on. It has 
at least one if not two water features emanating 
from existing basalt outcrops. Jets of water shoot 
into the air. Night lighting, paths, benches, and 
slopes respect the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Now, step back for a moment and consider 
where you are in your narrative-storyboard-­
design approach to designing the healing garden 
or your own design. You’ve maybe not designed it 
yet but at least you wrote a narrative and played 
with turning it into a storyboard. By writing a 
first-person narrative your approach is sensitive 
to the functional, social, psychological, and cultural contexts as dealt with and as experienced at 
eye level, by individuals looking for more than a 
garden – looking for a place of respite, rejuvenation, or, ideally, emotional comfort and calm.    
Given our understanding of the majority of 
healing garden users’ feelings, their confronting loss, their feeling lost, being confused with 
many more questions than answers, in the final 
analysis, is the garden developed in the plan-view 
approach described above as much of a healing 
place as yours is becoming using the narrative 
approach? In its layout and contents, the typically 
developed garden realizes people want a place in 
which to escape but it likely doesn’t realize (or 
express) the particular healing needed to address 
an individual’s emotional trauma. It may provide 
respite but we can only assume it helps visitors 
come to terms with the turmoil in their lives and 
lives of their loved ones, know they are not alone, 
know there is light (relief) beyond this otherwise 
suddenly dark and confusing mindset that comes 
with being told you or a loved one is dying. The 
plan-view designer, like most designers, is sincere, 
well-meaning, and concerned. Anyone would 
look and say that as a professional the designer 
met the standards outlined in the ASLA Code 
of Professional Ethics….but, knowing now what 
Figure 10.1 Healing garden design keyed to Ken Spiering’s Sketches.
256
you know of design from an experiential-narrative 
perspective is designing in plan view early on in 
the process the way to go? More to the point, is 
it ethical?
The fountains may spew water 4′ to 6′ in 
the air, not trickle lightly down the outcrops’ 
surfaces. The sound of the jetting water falling 
to the basalt echoes off the three buildings, as 
you get closer to a fountain the noise likely distracts you from what you are dealing with, from 
thoughts of a loved one or you facing an uncertain future. The colors may be too much, and 
Figure 10.2 A – Garden viewpoint: looking north along west side of garden. Courtesy Ken Spiering.
Figure 10.3 B – Garden viewpoint: looking north along east side of garden. Courtesy Ken Spiering.
257
if so, distracting. There isn’t a meeting between 
what the user is experiencing inwardly and what 
is around her. The garden is a well-designed 
garden, don’t get me wrong. The designer was 
sincere in what he or she did. But, considering 
the garden space through the minds and eyes 
of the anticipated users can bring nuances into 
the design that are so much more appropriate 
to their states of mind and outlooks on life. All 
these concerns are much more easily identified 
and expressed in an experiential narrative combined with accompanying eye-level storyboard 
sketches than a plan view. Plan views are products, end points, to be arrived at later in the 
narrative-storyboard-design process and not 
developed at the beginning. The beginning is 
what you allowed your first- or second-person 
narrative characters to bring to you as per Rae 
(1996), Kooser (2005), and Lamott’s (1994) 
recommendations, the manifestation of their 
behaviors as an outgrowth of their experiences 
with your emerging design.
After working through the pros and cons of 
plan view versus eye-level perspectives derived 
from a first-person narrative I realized the 
simple question is, which tells the more personal, the more sensual story, plan view or 
narrative come storyboard and eye-level perspectives?
Figure 10.4 C – Garden viewpoint: looking south from north side of garden. Courtesy Ken Spiering.
Figure 10.5 D – Garden viewpoint: looking west 
to basalt outcrop and waterfall.
258
A DESIGNER’S POWER
By now you may be wondering, “What’s driving 
Scarfo’s concern? It can’t just be his wish to find 
a formula for good design.” Well, it is and it isn’t. 
In my effort to understand how to do consistently 
good, no, great designs, meet people’s expectations, and be able to help others learn what I’ve 
learned, I realized the magnitude of our actions as 
the designers of other people’s worlds.
Designers wield a lot of power, yet few realize 
it. Thirty years ago I did a small survey of about 
30 landscape architects in order to understand 
the profession’s and professionals’ impact on land 
and life. While I’m sure the numbers are different today I am equally sure the message provided 
by the findings remains. My survey’s question 
to practitioners focused on their previous year’s 
involvement in single-family residential design. 
Among the respondents, one had not worked on 
any single-family residential design during the 
previous year. One had done one 1/8th acre plot. 
Still the estimates came to a ratio of each designer 
having influenced 353 acres in the previous year 
and an estimated 37.5 people’s lives each day.
Extrapolated over the approximate number of 
10,000 registered LA’s back then, we get, per landscape architect, 3,530,000 acres in single-family 
residences influenced per year, and an estimated 
375,000 users’ lives per day. Keep in mind that 
is just in single-family residential design. Today 
there are 267,000 people employed as landscape 
architects in the United States and 2,340 in 
Canada. You do the math.
ACCEPTING THE POWER
As we become aware of, and admit to, the power we 
wield, then the question becomes, to what extent 
are we willing to accept the responsibilities that 
come with designing the environments in which 
people will live, work, play, and grow up? Over the 
years I asked hundreds of senior landscape architecture students, within a few weeks of graduation, 
“If I randomly selected one of your classmates to 
design the environment you would live in for the 
next five years, would you accept that?” Over 95% 
responded “No,” some quite emphatically.
To my asking “Why?” the dominant response, 
by far, was “They don’t know me.” “But,” I’d 
respond, 
most of you have been together 
for four (and in some schools, 
five) years. You’ve gone as 
a group to classes. You’ve 
pulled all-nighters together. 
You’ve dated, broken up, and 
travelled together and more. 
How can you say you don’t 
know each other?
The discussion would continue. Usually about an 
hour into the discussion someone would blurt out 
something to the effect 
We don’t want someone we 
know and who knows us to 
design our living environment, 
and yet we’re about to 
graduate and start doing that 
to people we don’t know. From 
there on the discussion would 
turn to “What can we do to 
close that gap?
WE’VE COME A LONG WAY 
(OR HAVE WE?)
In The Reflective Practitioner (1983), Don Schon 
provides an excellent example of an environmental design professor and student’s interaction (79–102). This may be dated, but given my 
design studio experiences with architecture, interior design, and landscape architecture students 
up to just recently not much has changed. Schon 
sets the context. The students received “…a set of 
design specifications…for [the design of] an elementary school…Each student is to develop his 
259
own version of the design, recording his results 
in preliminary sketches, working drawings, and 
models” (88). During one review the student 
describes how she is stuck with “a set of problems 
she cannot solve” (80). Laying trace paper over 
the student’s work the instructor says, “The kindergarten might go over here…then you might 
carry the gallery level through – and look down 
into here” (80). Schon does an excellent job of 
describing a typical design instructor, student 
interaction; or what we know as the socialization 
of a future designer.
Whether the teacher or student “speak in 
words or drawings, their utterances refer to spatial 
images which they try to make congruent with 
one another” (80). In the socialization of soonto-be designers to an abstract design process and 
language Schon sees “the language of designing is 
a language game which [the instructor models for 
the student] displaying for her the competencies 
he would like her to acquire” (81).
Schon sees the design language game as a conversation between words and drawings, speaking 
while sketching. “Drawing and talking are parallel ways of designing, and together make up what 
I [Schon] call the language of designing” (80). 
Schon’s recognition of a “language of design” supports the benefits gained when you reflect your 
narrative text off your storyboard. The main difference between Schon’s instructor-student dialog 
and your narrative-storyboard dialog is that yours 
deals with people’s expectations and experiences 
while the other deals with geometry of spaces and 
objects.
Within the transcript Schon provides, the 
language-drawing dialectic is a back-and-forth 
reflection of geometric figures expressed in 
the integrated language of geometry and basic 
design. As presented in the teacher-student interaction, they are intertwined and gain direction 
from the instructor and student’s likes, wants, 
and wishes, not an expressed understanding 
of the elementary school students, teachers, or 
school administrators. Note the “I” viewpoint in 
the following. “I chose the site because it would 
relate to the field there but the approach is here. 
So I decided the gym must be here…I have the 
layout like this” (82). 
I had six of these classroom 
units, but they were too small 
in scale to do much with. So 
I changed them to this much 
more significant layout (the L 
shapes). It relates one to two, 
three to four, and five to six 
grades, which is more what I 
wanted to do educationally 
anyway. What I have here is a 
space in here which is more of a 
home base. I’ll have an outside/
outside which can be used and 
an outside/inside which can 
be used -- then that opens into 
your resource library/language 
thing.
(83)
The student “has also experimented with the size 
and arrangement of her classroom units, she has 
found that the classrooms must reach a threshold of scale in order to be ‘significant’ enough for 
design” (84). What that threshold is and how it 
was determined is never discussed or questioned 
let alone in terms of teaching and learning.
The professor’s suggestion to the student, “now 
this would allow you one private orientation from 
here and it would generate geometry in this direction” (85), is further elaborated upon by Schon 
as needing “coherence [that] must be given to 
the site in the form of geometry – ‘a discipline’ – 
which can be imposed upon it” (85).
The only actual reference in 23 pages (Schon, 
1983, 79–102) to any defined living, working, or 
learning activities in any part of the elementary 
school being designed is “we could have as much 
as 5-foot intervals, which for a kid is maximum 
height, right?” (88). And even that is stretching it.
Throughout the transcript decisions are 
expressed in terms of geometry as a “discipline,” 
260
and “I” and “We” as the bases of design decisions. 
Never are the design decisions expressed in terms 
of teachers or students. References to geometry 
are numerous by the architecture professor and 
Schon. The assumption, all along, is that a particular geometry, seemingly picked out of thin air, 
would provide for the best learning environment: 
“…because he finds that [playing with geometric figures] has produced something that he likes” 
(100). Schon goes further in referring to the professor as “a chess master who develops a feeling 
for constraints and potential of certain configurations of pieces on the board” (104). Schon gives 
him too much credit as a designer of spaces and 
places in which people gather to teach and to 
learn. With the human dynamics of teaching and 
learning never discussed as an influence for how 
the geometry is determined to be good or bad, the 
question again has to be asked, “Is this an ethical 
approach to designing an environment that will, 
for at least 40 to 50 years, support the maturation and socialization of individuals who come to 
make up society?”
I’m sure you can already answer that question with some authority. If, though, you’d like 
some help, three great sources are urban anthropologist Tim Sieber’s “Schoolrooms, Pupils, and 
Rules: The Role of Informality in Bureaucratic 
Socialization” (1979), anthropologist Norris 
Brock Johnson’s “Education as Environmental 
Socialization: classroom spatial patterns and the 
transmission of social norms” (1982), and social 
scientist Paul Willis’ Learning to Labor: how 
working class kids get working class jobs (1977). The 
three authors focus on the fact that what is taught 
and what is learned are often two very different things. Being instructed in Read’n, Write’n, 
and Rithmatic is what Sieber refers to as formal 
education. But as Sieber (1979) and Johnson 
(1982) show us “a school’s dual function as an 
organization that at once educates children formally through instruction in ‘the three R’s,’ [also] 
socializes them informally in the basic modes of 
behavior appropriate to bureaucratic settings” 
(Sieber, 1979, 274). Norris Brock Johnson (1982) 
complements Sieber’s looking into the socialization of youth through their formal and informal 
interactions with authority figures by drawing our 
attention to not what is said and carried out but 
where it is said and done.
Johnson shows us how, through our formative 
years, we are socialized through the configuration, 
content, and character of our material culture. “As 
well as interacting with other human beings, people 
invariably interact socially and culturally with the 
materially defined forms and spaces they inhabit” 
(Johnson, 1982, 31). This not only makes sense 
given the recognition that space is a social product, 
but also adds to Churchill’s dictum that “We shape 
our buildings and afterwards our buildings shape 
us.” Consider how, over your first few years in elementary school, your indoor preschool play area 
disappeared and was replaced by desks all facing 
forward aimed at the teacher’s much larger desk 
and blackboard. What were you learning from the 
evolving spatial makeup of your classrooms? 
Johnson’s study (1982) of a midwestern elementary school shows the transition from, in a 
sense, a “free-range” educational environment to 
institutionally structured Cartesian environment. 
While his findings spanned preschool through 
Figure 10.6.1 Preschool floor plan (Johnson, 
1982, 34). Courtesy of the Anthropological 
Quarterly.
261
sixth grade, many of us likely experienced the 
same transition in a shorter time span, e.g., preschool to first or second grade.
Johnson refers to Edward Hall (1969) when 
he says “School settings themselves, the contexts 
of everyday classroom life, are a “hidden dimension.” Then Willis (1977), while taking a different tact entirely, shows how socialization occurs 
among youth and between youth. “He shows how 
kids, through their own activity and ideological 
development, reproduce themselves as a working 
class” (1977, xi). With these individuals’ insights 
into learning, what we must admit to is that space 
is not only a social product but also a socializing 
product involving the material environment and 
much of what transpires in it.
Granted, in Schon’s transcript, there are 
accompanying graphics the professor and student 
produced as they talked, but what is interesting 
is that in designer speak versus first-person narrative speak of someone experiencing the spaces 
you often don’t even know what they are talking 
about. A teacher’s story, or a student’s story, would 
have made this entire dialog clearer from the 
beginning.
Schon, as a language analyst, presents us 
with Figure 3.2 (on page 96 of The Reflective 
Practitioner), Normative Design Domains. It 
lists 12 normative design domains in all. No 
Design Domain identifies any group of people 
who would be left to live with the design if constructed…The “Domain” of Program/Use comes 
closest to recognizing the users with “such terms 
as ‘classroom,’ ‘administration,’ and ‘kindergarten’ 
buildings labelled according to their uses” (97).
Figure 10.6.2 Third grade floor plan (Johnson, 
1982, 38). Courtesy of the Anthropological 
Quarterly.
Figure 10.6.3 Fifth- and sixth-grade floor plan 
(Johnson, 1982, 39). Courtesy of the Anthropological Quarterly.
Figure 10.7 Schon’s normative design domains 
(1983, 96). Courtesy Hachette Books Group.
262
Keep two things in mind. Knowing university professors and instructors as I do, I feel safe 
saying that neither the professor nor the student 
in Schon’s transcript had any formal teaching/
learning background. Yet, they both discuss 
the spatial configurations that would foster and 
support teaching and learning without ever mentioning those activities while they are both situated in a teaching and learning environment: 
their studio and building are dedicated to education. In addition, I’m sure both had attended 
kindergarten through sixth grade. The form of 
“reflection” they could have but didn’t carry out 
could have been their own learning-experience 
stories which they then could have brought to 
their design process/discussion to help determine 
the “geometry.” Remember, “…the places, spaces, 
and things take their form from the planned experiences” (Simonds, 1961, 225). But in Schon’s 
instructor-student interaction the places, spaces, 
and things would have given rise to unexpressed 
and unexpected experiences.
While I don’t believe it, I couldn’t keep the 
thought out of my mind that just maybe the 
landscape students were correct in not accepting 
the random selection of one of their classmates 
to design the environment they would live in for 
five years.
ON TRACK ACADEMY
Years later, in 2018, one of Spokane, Washington’s 
alternative high schools, On Track Academy 
(OTA), received sufficient state funding to contract the design and construction of a flexible 
Makerspace as part of a larger middle-school 
high-school campus. In April 2019 Integrus 
Architecture, 
in 
Spokane, 
produced 
the 
Educational Specifications document (the cover 
of which is shown here) for On Track Academy 
and Spokane Public Schools. The 134-page 
document followed the interaction between the 
architects, OTA administration, faculty, staff, students, and community representatives between 
September 2018 and April 2019 and reported 
the results in three sections: Vision Development, 
Process, and Program. Discussions leading up to 
the “geometry” that would make up On Track’s 
makerspace and new building were ripe with 
references to and feedback from teachers about 
teaching, students about learning, and the greater 
community and its involvement in the eventual 
school programs. In fact, in the architects’ document, the words student and students appear 
203 times, teach, teachers, and teaching 59 times, 
and learn or learning 136 times. On February 11, 
2020 Integrus architects made a public presentation that was almost entirely about people, their 
asked for activities, the kinds of interactions that 
would occur between the kids, the teachers, the 
kids and their teachers, and the activities they 
would carry out. All this as the delineated physical 
structure and visuals of the various activity spaces 
were presented but not overtly described for their 
geometry.
If there is a spectrum along which we can 
see how designers are taught to interact with 
clients and user groups, Schon’s architecture 
professor and student interactions are at one 
end and the Integrus architects are at the other. 
For me, I couldn’t help but be curious as to how 
the Integrus architects came to practice such a 
Figure 10.8 Integrus architecture. Report cover 
page, Educational Specifications for On Track 
Academy. Courtesy Integrus Architecture & 
Spokane Public Schools.
263
­people-first, user-centered approach to design. 
Did they learn it in school or did they develop it 
over the years after they graduated? So, I asked. 
Five of the designers’ responses indicted they 
developed their sensitivities to users after graduation. The feeling was that their schooling dealt 
more with the “theory and philosophy” of design 
and spaces and that interacting with user groups 
“was completely learned after graduation.” One 
of the architects, previously a student of mine at 
the Interdisciplinary Design Institute in Spokane, 
WA, shared the following:
Personally, school taught 
me skills for presentation, 
vocabulary, how to think 
outside the box, look critically 
at things etc., and understand 
design. Studio focused on 
coming up with an idea and 
translating that into space, it 
was far more theoretical. From 
my sampling of a few other 
architects, consensus was it 
seems very little of our training 
was actually about the practice 
of architecture. It did not focus 
as much on interactions with 
clients, user groups, or putting 
together a set of construction 
documents.
I was asked once during an 
interview to show the process 
we would use to start the 
layout of a building on a site 
devoid of any input from the 
interview group (they wanted 
to see how we worked together 
in the approach of a design). 
I stopped half way through 
and said “THIS IS SOOOO 
TOUGH….because this 
isn’t how we design!” A good 
design is absolutely based on 
input…. What are issues with 
drop off and pick up? What 
type of experience do you want 
students to have as they enter? 
Are they interested in outdoor 
learning? Where are the 
prevailing breezes? What are 
some of the security concerns? 
The list goes on and on!! The 
students, teachers, and public 
who use the building are the 
ones who know what works 
and what doesn’t work and 
have the hopes and dreams 
for what it could become. We 
ended up getting the job…
which was awesome…. and it 
validated for me how critical 
the time and energy spent 
meeting with the users was to 
the success of the overall design.
WHAT COMES WITH THE 
NARRATIVE-STORYBOARDDESIGN APPROACH?
And there is no doubt that 
equal access has improved society 
264
immensely, creating a society that 
is more tolerant, respectful, and 
inclusive. But equal access suffers 
from one major shortcoming: it 
aims to maximize individual 
opportunity on average by 
ensuring that everyone has 
access to the same standardized 
system, whether or not the system 
actually fits.
(Rose, 2016, 186)
Side note: if you apply this 
thinking to education you begin 
to understand why outstanding 
alternative high schools such as 
On Track Academy in Spokane, 
WA exist and come to outshine 
traditional high schools with a 
94% graduation rate while the 
State average is 81%.
(see https://www.greatschools.
org/washington/spokane/5759On-Track-Academy/)
I’m sure something similar to The Analogy is out 
there, but 35 years of working with a narrative 
approach to design, an approach that starts with 
a narrative of people’s experiences and expectations, I have yet to find it. Designers, researchers, and authors of design studies are all sincere 
in  their efforts to expand our understanding 
of how best to approach projects sympathetic 
to land and life. Their efforts focus on people, 
society,  and  culture, health and well-being, 
economic and resource benefits, deep ecology, 
anthropocentricism, and so much more. But their 
identified benefits regarding the recipients of each 
particular approach often remain, at best generalized across society, and at worse assumed. The 
benefits noted remain expressed as demographics, 
or a geographical area or region. Assumptions are 
averages and according to Todd Rose, there is “no 
such thing as average” (Rose, 2016, 4). What the 
­narrative-storyboard-design approach does is flip 
the outside-looking-in to an inside-looking-out; 
the benefits of an ecological responsibility, health 
and well-being, social justice are still there but as 
most likely experienced through the eyes, ears, 
noses, skin, and taste buds of those who will be a 
part of the final design, the real subjects as living, 
breathing gotta-get-through-the-day people. As 
my previous student said, above, they “are the 
ones who know what works and what doesn’t.”
So, now, let’s ask the question again. Given 
your understanding of the sequential, human 
experiences that can be identified and designed 
for in a narrative cum storyboard, is it ethical to 
move designer-selected objects about in plan view 
until the objects’ layout “looks good” without 
reflecting on and specifically expressing the users’ 
experiences and expectations?
ETHICAL RESPONSIBILITIES
One major difference exists between design decisions associated with planning a trip and those associated with developing a design. That difference, and 
it is one I have never heard faculty, students, or practitioners discuss, is that the trip’s decisions are made 
by the person taking the trip. Many of the decisions 
associated with a landscape, architectural, or interior design are made by a designer who is working 
in the service of someone else who, in a sense, will 
be taking the trip. Although licensed to work in 
the service of others, designers tend to work within 
their personal realm, or worldview. As a result, they 
tend to argue for designs as though the designs were 
theirs. Designers often talk as though they own the 
product, forgetting that the product is a set of drawings, and that they were paid to do them and therefore relinquish ownership. Insinuated throughout 
most arguments for the goodness of a design is the 
unspoken belief that “I will live in my product.”
As designers we rarely live with our products, 
even while they are under construction. Still we 
argue (I wanted; I needed; I liked) for the good265
ness of our work as though we will be the residents, the problem is that in our presentations 
we are actually promoting the goodness of a commodity for sale. As a professional, whose reputation rests on the quality of my products, this is a 
vastly different view of my work from the false 
belief that “I will have to live in my product.” 
Our professional codes of conduct clearly state 
that we work in the service of others. Others, not 
us, are left to inhabit and sustain our designed 
products. Therefore, there is a need for designers to recognize the social structures inherent in 
the systems that will come to sustain each design. 
With that recognition of the other’s (clients and 
users) structuring systems we are able to unfold 
the social rationale in which our design decisions 
are legitimized and the physical palette from 
which the design gains its component parts. This 
approach complements Spirn’s thinking throughout Language of Landscape (1998) and particularly 
her thought that 
Architects and landscape 
architects tend to focus not 
on process, but on form and 
material; when they fail to be 
sustained in the real world, it is 
often because designers ignore 
the processes that shape them 
during and after construction.
(96)
There are a couple ways to consider our responsibilities to those we serve, those who live with 
our products as part of their daily routines. First, 
we are responsible for what we do for (and to) 
others, and second, done well, we are to an extent 
responsible for what they do for us, themselves 
and the earth.
The ethics I’m talking about here are those that 
guide one group of people who have the socially 
conveyed authority to modify landscapes, structures, and interiors in which others live, work, 
play, learn, raise families, grow old, and to an 
extent direct society. There are other forms of 
ethics dealing with ecology, natural resources, 
social justice, feminism, and more. But here, 
I want to shine a particular light on the ethical 
responsibilities designers accept with every project 
they take on. The responsibility to understand 
and anticipate not their wishes, wants, and likes 
but the wishes, wants, and likes of the people for 
whom they design. Given the interaction between 
teacher and student in The Reflective Practitioner, 
that cannot happen.
Given the rapid, interconnected pace of life 
today, designers can’t, on their own, take full 
responsibility for the stewardship of the earth 
and the resources it provides. But, by developing designed environments with which the users 
identify, find personally meaningful, and sustain 
a sense of personal, and existential orientation 
in their individual and collective lives they are as 
likely as designers to carry out the responsibilities of stewards of the land. Remember earlier, the 
examples of people maintaining and sustaining 
those environments in which they “see themselves; with which they identify and in which 
they find meaning”? This approach and outcome, 
by its very nature, embodies the public acting as 
stewards of their environments and includes a 
high degree of social justice at a more detailed and 
personal level than related to natural resources, 
ecology, and land planning.
Designers can do this by adopting an empathetic outlook to those for whom they design – 
both the clients who pay to maintain the designs 
and those who use them. When the users sense 
they have been recognized and respected by the 
clients (usually not considering the designers’ 
role), they are less likely to vandalize and more 
likely to care for a site and its features. As I noted 
earlier, I believe that most of what is considered 
vandalism is actually an effort on the part of the 
users to reformulate a place to that with which 
they identify and what identifies them to others. 
Again, go move some pencils, a cup of coffee, a 
notepad, or a laptop around on someone’s desk 
while they are away. Call that your design and see 
what the person does when she or he returns to 
their desk. You can almost hear them saying, “I 
have to regain a sense of comfort with my space so 
it reflects who I am.” As for me, Bob Scarfo, I still 
266
can’t understand how anyone can leave a perfectly 
ordered desk at the end of each workday. That just 
isn’t me.
Users who feel respected, who identify with 
and find meaning in their designed spaces, care 
for those spaces, steward those places and in so 
doing reduce the client’s cost to maintain them. 
Merged with a design that similarly respects the 
local ecology, and to an extent maintains itself, 
maintenance costs are even lower. This is the 
kind of stewardship that comes with understanding users’ values, expectations, and emotional 
attachments. This comes not with the language of 
geometry and basic design, but with the stories or 
narratives that make up the expected experiences 
of those for whom a design is being produced.
“Finally, consequentialist ethics often drives 
our thinking about future landscapes, how we 
should judge our current behavior in terms of its 
expected consequences” (Fisher 2013, 44). I always 
enjoyed Tony Bauer’s (of Bauer Ford Reclamation) 
presentations of his approach to mine and quarry 
reclamation. I was most impressed with how he 
would, with the client’s help, study the mining 
or quarrying processes and come to know the 
consequences of those ­processes. With an understanding of the years-long site operation he would 
then develop a program whereby waste, as it 
was being produced, was to be moved to those 
locations where it’d be most easily, with minimal 
additional movement, introduced into the reclamation design once the operation closed down. 
The reclamation design became a planned act of 
stewardship (Fisher would say, “Consequences”) 
on the part of the mining or quarrying company’s actions. By developing designs through the 
intended users’ expectations we are, in fact, acting 
on the consequences of our actions as empathetic 
designers.
Our ethical responsibilities extend beyond 
what the American Society of Landscape 
Architects proclamations state. They shouldn’t 
but they do. As professional landscape architects, 
yes we are a business with legal responsibilities, 
yes we are professionals with financial responsibilities to our peers, outside contractors, and clients. 
But we are also designers of the day-to-day worlds 
in which thousands upon thousands of people 
live, work, play, raise families, go to church, and 
learn. This last area of responsibility, to those who 
use, live in, and grow old in our designs, is to a great 
extent neglected. Yet annually landscape architects 
influence hundreds to thousands of acres of land 
and even more people’s lives in all kinds of land uses.
An outgrowth of authoring landscape, architectural, and interior narratives sensitive to and 
anticipatory of people’s experiences is that we 
become much more aware of and sensitive to 
how well we can serve people of all ages and backgrounds. This is the area of ethics to which we 
need to be better attuned.
How we accomplish that needed attention is 
built into The Analogy. This area of professional 
design ethics that comes as a natural outgrowth 
of a designer-as-author, landscape-as-text, and 
participant-as-reader is a consequence of the 
­narrative-storyboard-design approach to what we 
do as landscape architects.
In this day and age of tightening budgets 
(which seems like all the time) the Healing Garden 
received the  love and attention of hospital and 
healing center administrators and staff in the form 
of a fund raiser to pay for needed maintenance and 
upkeep. The value to those who found the garden 
to be a refuge over the last 20 years speaks to the 
garden design’s recognition of people’s wishes and 
hopes. An even greater symbol of the garden’s 
success in meeting people’s expectations appeared 
in an odd occurrence. From the beginning Sister 
Bernadette said there was to be no food in the 
garden. Yet, somewhere along the line, people did 
Figure 10.9 Friends of the garden fund raising 
event, June 28, 2017. Photo by author.
267
start to bring their lunches. Contrary to Sister B’s 
concerns, and although there were no trash receptacles in the garden, there was also no trash left in 
the garden. The bringing of personal lunches into 
the serenity of the healing garden has expanded 
to summer events where there is music and food.
CLOSE
I am sure that at some point you have thought 
“What’s the likelihood of two designers employing the narrative-storyboard-design approach to 
producing designs with mutually agreed upon 
design outcomes?” The usual approach to design 
would not likely produce similar, mutually 
agreed upon design outcomes. Yet, in a CalPoly 
workshop, in which 27 students from freshman 
to third-year graduates, using the experiential 
­narrative-storyboard-design approach, did in fact, 
and to everyone’s surprise especially after hearing 
all 27 narratives, unexpectedly find a great deal of 
similarity across the designs. If there was a phase 
of mutual understanding and agreement in the 
­narrative-storyboard-design process, it was with 
our defining the potential users, in terms of their 
states of mind, their reasons for visiting the garden, 
and their likely expectations. Understanding the 
likely users was the key to success. Remember 
the differences in the narratives. You read a tree’s 
concern with a visitor to the garden. Another 
was a gentleman wondering if the flowers by his 
bed came from the garden. And one you didn’t 
read was a dishwasher upset with the way his 
day was going, kicking trash cans out of his way, 
and stomping across the street to escape into the 
healing garden. With those 27 different narratives 
and more you can understand our surprise at the 
fact the resulting designs were so similar. I’m sorry 
I haven’t copies of any of the designs to share here.
To date, the American Society of Landscape 
Architects guiding principles remain primarily 
aimed at business relations, working relations 
with peers, and financial practices with clients. 
What mentions there are regarding servicing 
the public’s health, safety, and welfare, the substantive nature of design services, remains vague. 
Yet, somewhat more defined guides to professional practice are found in the ASLA Code of 
Environmental Ethics. The opening umbrella 
statement – “Members of the American Society of 
Landscape Architects (ASLA) should make every 
effort within our sphere of influence to enhance, 
respect, and restore the life-sustaining integrity 
of the landscape for all living things” (https://
www.asla.org/ContentDetail.aspx?id=4308) – is 
followed by an extensive list of ethical standards expressed as professional practices (land 
planning and design behaviors) and anticipated 
environmental outcomes. This addendum to the 
ASLA Code of Professional Ethics and Standards 
of Professional Practice opens the possibility for a second addendum to the Standards of 
Professional practice that focus on design practices and outcomes based upon landscape users’ 
anticipated experiences, their cultural and social 
backgrounds, and their diversity. It might be 
called ASLA Code of Site Design and Planning 
Ethics. As landscape architects continue to strive 
to be publicly recognized on par with architecture 
and engineering, a publicly expressed step toward 
design outcomes in terms of users’ anticipated 
experiences would likely be favorably received by 
clients and the general public. I have to imagine 
such added clarity to our design and planning 
responsibilities, practices, and outcomes would 
garner greater public support for the Society and 
its members.
Figure 10.10 Friends of the garden fund raising 
event, June 28, 2017. Photo by author.
268
If a form of Site Design and Planning Ethics 
became a reality, then I could see comparable modifications being brought into Landscape Architecture 
Accreditation Board (LAAB) standards and associated assessment criteria. If ASLA Professional Site 
Design and Planning Ethics were introduced and 
related modifications made to the LAAB assessment 
criteria then it isn’t difficult to imagine related modifications being made across Professional University 
Programs, the Council of Landscape Architectural 
Registration Boards (CLARB), and Landscape 
Architect Registration Exam (LARE).
Would all this remove the part played by 
assumptions in the work of landscape architects? 
I wish I could say “yes”; maybe over a number of 
years. For now, it would constitute a major step 
toward ensuring that landscape architects’ design 
products contribute to the social and emotional 
makeup of the public’s health, safety, welfare, and 
individuals’ lifeworlds.
I am still learning about my profession, my 
potentials as a landscape architect, and my 
responsibilities. Working my way through The 
Analogy’s experiential narrative approach to 
design has helped a lot. The designer-as-author, landscape-as-text (or narrative), and user, 
­participant-as-reader approach to design  still has 
so much be illuminated and dealt with explicitly. I ask you to stay open and alert to what you 
read, see in photographs, watch in films. How 
many ways can one characterize an emotional 
experience in a landscape? How many ways can 
one trigger a planned for emotional experience; 
a particular emotional experience through vegetation, building materials, water, sculpture, 
cloth banners, and more? How can these items 
be used, not as primary expressive features but 
as a means of attracting your eye or ear to the 
primary feature, expression, statement; to the 
user-participant’s sequential experiences?
Searching for that formula that enables us 
to produce consistently good landscape architectural designs has been exciting and fun. Like 
John Simonds, only after much thought, lots of 
observation, and a number of loops back to my 
early days as a landscape architecture student, 
I realize the power in Simonds’ epiphany. We 
design experiences. Not sure I’ve discovered the 
formula for good design yet but designing for 
people’s experiences is certainly a key factor. My 
hope is that current landscape architects (or architects or ­interior designers) or some of you among 
those soon-to-be designers will pick up my formula-hunting challenge, dig deeper than I’ve 
gone, and help make learning and doing design 
less ambiguous, more focused in its approach, and 
more consistently appropriate to the people and 
places we influence.
In reading this far, you have uncovered so much 
regarding designing landscape experiences. My hope 
is that even if you do not adopt the narrative-storyboard-design approach, you will employ what you 
gained from Landscape Architecture as Storytelling. I 
hope you have become sufficiently sensitized that 
you are open and alert to what you read in your surroundings, in photographs, in films and apply that 
to designing a better world for others.
LOOKING BACK TO 
POSSIBILITIES
As designers we can learn a lot from fiction and 
non-fiction writers and those who walk the blurry 
line between the two: e.g., Henry David Thoreau 
(1973), Wendell Berry (1968; 1969; 2013), Barry 
Lopez (1987; 2004; 2019), and Loren Eiseley 
Epilogue
Figure 11.1 Exley Falls, Horseshoe Lake, WA; 
Courtesy Karen Shields.
270
(1957; 1978). All along we’ve talked about the 
movement of the user as a reader of landscapes 
and a little about sun and shadow, changing 
seasons, and rustling leaves in trees. Before leaving 
narrative, we should think about the other forms 
of motion and other forms of seeing that can be 
used in a landscape text to supplement a narrative 
and its associated meanings.
First to mind, for me, is our senses’ natural 
attraction to water. As for meanings associated with 
water, there is so much to be considered: birth, 
rebirth, renewal, baptism, and cleansing. Most 
readily though is the passage of time. It could be 
slow and subtle or raging and loud or our passing 
by it or sitting and enjoying the visuals and wind 
chime-like sounds. When considering water, as with 
many other landscape features, the changing seasons 
bring a lot to be considered: liquid, vapor, ice in its 
various forms and beyond the water’s edge; movement of stars, planets, the agrarian rhythms of the 
four seasons, or maybe your tomato garden and the 
salads and salsas it provides come fall.
For an exciting journey into what nature has 
to offer you as a designer-author through the four 
seasons and day and night times, read Thoreau’s 
Walden (1973) and learn to see and read landscapes as Thoreau did. As a sample:
The phenomena of the year 
take place every day in a 
pond on a small scale. Every 
morning…the shallow water 
is being warmed more rapidly 
than the deep…and every 
evening it is being cooled more 
rapidly until the morning. 
The day is an epitome of the 
year. The night is the winter, 
the morning and evening are 
spring and fall, and the noon 
is the summer. The cracking 
and booming of ice indicate a 
change of temperature…the 
pond began to boom about an 
hour after sunrise, when it felt 
the influence of the sun’s rays…
it stretched itself and yawned 
like a waking man…
(301)
The [pond’s] first ice is 
especially interesting and 
perfect, being hard, dark, and 
transparent, and affords the 
best opportunity that ever 
offers for examining the bottom 
where it is shallow…only two 
or three inches distant, like 
a picture behind a glass, and 
the water is necessarily always 
smooth then…but the ice itself 
is the object of most interest…
the morning after it freezes, you 
find that the greater part of the 
bubbles, which at first appeared 
to be within it, are against its 
under surface, and that more 
are continually rising from the 
bottom…these bubbles are …
very clear and beautiful, and 
you see your face reflected in 
them through the ice.
(246–247)
In Walden, Thoreau provides so much more, basically a daily, if not in some instances hourly, diary 
of the pond and its surrounds. So many examples 
of what can be seen, heard, felt, smelled, and tasted 
271
when people slow down and look to their feet, above 
their heads, up ahead, and back to where they’ve 
been versus where they’re going.
If you’d like to be fascinated and enhance 
your understanding of nature as a medium of 
art and aesthetics, you have to explore Andy 
Goldsworthy’s ephemeral earth art (1990; 2015). 
A sample is found here: https://kellyeimwrapped.
weebly.com/andy-goldsworthy.html
READING AND WRITING
I had to close The Analogy with examples of a few 
authors’, to use Kevin Lynch’s term in a different context, sensuous writing. Fiction and non-­
fiction writers help us read environments so much 
more clearly than we usually do.
Lawrence Durrell, “Landscape and Character” 
in Spirit of Place:
‘You write’ says a friendly critic 
in Ohio, ‘as if the landscape 
were more important than 
the characters.’ If not exactly 
true, this is near enough the 
mark, for I have evolved a 
private notion about the 
importance of landscape, and 
I willingly admit to seeing 
‘characters’ almost as functions 
of landscape. This has only 
come about in recent years after 
a good deal of travel…[I’m] a 
‘residence writer’. My books are 
always about living in places, 
not just rushing through them.
(1969, 156)
Can you imagine people, the landscape readers 
of your narratives, wanting to reside in your 
designs rather than, without thought, just rushing 
through them?
D. H. Lawrence, Sketches of Etruscan Places:
And at the top [of the hill] is 
a fragment of public garden, 
and a look-out…We walk 
to the parapet, and suddenly 
are looking into one of the 
most delightful landscapes 
I have ever seen: as it were, 
into the very virginity of 
hilly green country. It is all 
wheat green and soft and 
swooping, swooping down 
and up, and glowing with 
green newness, and no houses. 
Down goes the declivity 
below us, then swerving the 
Figure 11.2 Spangle, WA. Photo by author.
272
curve and up again, to the 
neighboring hill that faces 
in all its greenness and longrunning immaculateness. 
Beyond, the hills ripple away 
to the mountains, and far in 
the distance stands a round 
peak, that seems to have an 
enchanted city on the summit.
Such a pure, uprising, 
unsullied country, in the 
greenness of wheat on an April 
morning!
The hill opposite is like a 
distinct companion. The near 
end is quite steep and wild, 
with evergreen-oaks and scrub, 
and specks of black-and-white 
cattle on the slopes of common. 
But the long crest is green 
again with wheat, running 
and drooping to the south. And 
immediately one feels: that hill 
has a soul, it has a meaning.
(2007, 353)
Wendell Berry, (2000) Life Is a Miracle: An Essay 
Against Modern Superstition:
No human being has ever 
known, let alone imagined, the 
entire planet. And even in an 
age of ‘world travel,’ none of us 
lives on the entire planet; in fact, 
owing to so much mobility, a lot 
of people…don’t live anywhere. 
But if we are to know any 
part of the planet intimately, 
particularly, precisely, and 
with affection, then we must 
live somewhere in particular 
for a long time. We must be 
able to call up to the mind’s eye 
by name a lot of local places, 
people, creatures, and things. 
Figure 11.3 Sunrise on the Palouse, Eastern, WA. Courtesy Evelyn Georgeson, Spokane, WA.
273
One of the most significant costs 
of the economic destruction of 
farm populations is the loss of 
local memory, local history, 
and local names. Field names 
for instance, even such colorless 
names as ‘the front field’ and 
‘the back field’ are vital signs of 
a culture. If the arts and sciences 
ever waken from their rapture 
of academic specialization, they 
will make themselves at home in 
places they have helped to spoil, 
and set about reconstructing 
histories and remembering 
names.
(2000, 138)
Berry (1981) continues in “A Country of Edges”:
It is a country of overwhelming 
edges. Again, and again, 
walking down from the wooded 
ridge tops above the Red River 
Gorge one comes into the sound 
of water falling – the steady 
pouring and splattering of a 
tiny stream that has reached its 
grand occasion…One looks up 
twenty or thirty or fifty or more 
feet to where the water leaps 
off the rock lip, catching the 
sunlight as it falls. Maybe there 
will be a rainbow in the spray. 
The trail may have passed 
through the little shelves or 
terraces covered with wild iris 
in bloom. Or along the stream 
sides below the falls there may 
be pink lady’s slippers. The 
slopes will be thickly scrubbed 
with rhododendron, darkened 
by the heavy green shade or 
hemlocks. And always on the 
wet faces of the rock there will 
be liverwort and meadow rue 
and mosses and ferns.
The critical fact about water, 
wherever you find it in the 
Red River Gorge, is motion. 
Moving, it is gathering. All the 
little seeps and trickles of the 
slopes, the tiny streams heading 
up near the ridge tops and 
Figure 11.4 Red River Gorge, KY.  
Photo by author.
274
leaping and tumbling down the 
steep ravines – all are moving 
toward their union with the 
river…
And in the movement of its 
waters the place also is in 
motion; not to the human eye, 
nor to the collective vision of 
human history, but within the 
long gaze of geologic time the 
Gorge is moving within itself, 
deepening, changing the outline 
of its slopes; the river is growing 
into it like a great tree, steadily 
incising its branches into the 
land.
(1981, 224)
Barry Lopez, Arctic Dreams; and Vintage Lopez
Lopez has a thought quite similar to one 
I’ve had regarding landscape narratives. Over 
the years, authors of all kinds have opened my 
mind to what’s around me. They have an eye 
for so much that many of us don’t. My reaction 
when reading Lopez, or Durrell, or Lawrence, or 
Jackson is so often “Oh my God, I’ve  looked at 
that 100 times and never seen it like that before.” 
What I do so enjoy about what I find in this and 
that author’s work and then being able to bring an 
aspect of it into a landscape narrative is how they 
reach in and touch our subconscious, only to have 
us wonder hours or days later, “Why did I feel 
that way?” Given so many of their observations 
and ways of expressing those observations, I can’t 
help but believe that those who participate in our 
landscape narratives – those who walk past, touch 
unknowingly – see so casually that they too register in their subconscious the subtle beauty and 
symbolic meanings only to, hours or days later, 
wonder “Why did I feel that way?” That is why 
reading such authors as mentioned throughout 
Landscape Architecture as Storytelling, remaining 
open and sensitive to such settings, provides us 
with an ever-increasing design palette – wordy, 
expressive, meaning-full design palette.
Lying there in the tent, I 
knew, as does everyone I 
think who spends some time 
Figure 11.5 Providence sacred heart healing 
garden, Spokane, WA. Photo by author.
Figure 11.6 El Potrero Chico’s limestone cliffs 
and spires up to 2,000′ in the Mexican state of 
Nuevo León. Photo by author.
275
hunting with Eskimos, that 
they are… a people, some of 
them, still close to the earth, 
maintaining the rudiments 
of an ancient philosophy of 
accommodation with it that 
we have abandoned. Our 
first wisdom as a species, 
that unique metaphorical 
knowledge that distinguishes 
us, grew out of such an 
intimacy with the earth; and, 
however far we may have 
come since that time, it did 
not seem impossible to me 
that night to go back and  
find it.
(Lopez, 1987, 35)
It is through the power of 
observation, the gifts of eye and 
ear, of tongue and nose and 
finger, that a place first rises 
up in our mind; afterward it 
is a memory that carries the 
place that allows it to grow in 
depth and complexity. For as 
long as our records go back, we 
have held these two things dear, 
landscape and memory.
(Lopez, 2004, 96)
Imagine capturing Wendell Berry’s waterfall 
imagery, Lopez’s contemplative moment, or 
Durrell’s panoramic orchestration of a landscape 
in even one design in a lifetime.
J. B. Jackson, A Sense of Place, a Sense of Time:
Like millions of other 
Americans I have no great 
liking for wilderness and 
forest, but like the majority of 
Americans I am fond of trees: 
individual trees, trees in rows 
along the street or in orchards, 
trees in parks. I continue to 
plant them when and where 
I can – to such an extent that 
when their leaves start to fall I 
look forward to many months 
of raking and transplanting in 
preparation for the spring.
(Jackson, 1994, 95)
Many of my students wondered in a “Really? Are 
you kidding me?” kind of way, why I had them 
do so much reading and writing. Easy. The better 
Figure 11.7 Manito Blvd, Spokane, WA.  
Photo by author.
276
reader you are, the better you can express yourself; 
the better your insight and eye-sight, the better 
designer you are. People who see the world in 
ways that we so rarely do have so much to bring 
to our design palettes. As Italo Calvino shows us, 
what you read does not have to be from nature 
writers, agrarian philosophers, or travelers:
Italo Calvino, Invisible Cities:
In Eudoxia, which spreads both 
up and down, with winding 
alleys, steps, dead ends, hovels, a 
carpet is preserved … But if you 
pause and examine it closely, 
you become convinced that each 
place in the carpet corresponds 
to a place in the city and all 
the things contained in the 
city are included in the design, 
arranged according to their 
true relationship, which escapes 
your eye distracted by the bustle, 
the throngs, the shoving. All of 
Eudoxia’s confusion, the mules’ 
braying, the lampblack stains, 
the fish smell is what is evident 
in the incomplete perspective 
you grasp; but the carpet proves 
that there is a point from 
which the city shows its true 
proportions, the geometrical 
scheme implicit in its every, 
tiniest detail
(1974, 96)
Read, read, and read some more and keep notes 
on the ways you think to transfer what you read, 
what’s behind what you read, or what is between 
the lines, into design features. Who knows, 
Calvino’s carpet, may just have given rise to the 
Gateway fountain in Salem, Massachusetts.
The Fountain at East India Square is a stone 
fountain, designed by John Collins, showing the 
changes in Salem’s topography as the waterfront 
area was dredged and filled. The fountain’s top layer 
shows the shoreline of Salem before many areas were 
filled in. The bottom layer is Salem’s shoreline today. 
Called “Salem’s Gateway to the Far East” the fountain was completed in 1976 and acts not only as a 
fountain but also as a small amphitheater. See
http://www.noblenet.org/salem/wiki/index.
php/East_India_Square_Fountain
I HAVE TWO HOPES
I hope my Dad has followed my personal and 
professional journey since he passed away in 1991 
and come to agree with me that landscape architecture is so much more than planting bushes. I 
wish Mom and Dad were alive today to see how 
the hell I put them through in making me read 
out loud for an hour a night paid off in so many 
ways. Thanks you two.
And finally, if we started Landscape Architecture 
as Storytelling, as just that, a comparison between 
landscape and an authored narrative, given all that 
is written, and all we’ve discussed about text, narrative, oral history, semiotics (sign, symbols, signified, signifier), it is safe to say landscape is more 
than an analogy. Landscape is a text in its own 
right, not of individual statements but of narratives capable of providing us with experiences that 
at least meet, if not exceed our expectations. 
Figure 11.8 Salem’s Gateway to the Far 
East Fountain, Salem, MA. Shutterstock ID: 
1804746124. Contributor: Wangkun Jia.
277
Bibliography
Abbott, E. A. 1991. Flatland: A Romance of Many 
Dimensions. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Adams, J. 1976. Conceptual Blockbusting: A 
Pleasurable Guide to Better Problem Solving. San 
Francisco: San Francisco Book Company.
Al-Husain, L., Kanjo, E. and Chamberlain, A. 
2013. “Sense of Space: Mapping Physiological 
Emotional 
Response 
in 
Urban 
Space.” 
UniComp’13 (September): 1321–1324.
Alexander, C. 1977. A Pattern Language: Towns, 
Building, and Construction. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Alexander, C. 1979. The Timeless Way of Building. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Alon-Mozes, T. 2006. “From ‘Reading’ the 
Landscape to ‘Writing’ a Garden: The Narrative 
Approach in the Design Studio.” Journal of 
Landscape Architecture (Wageningen, Netherlands) 
1, no. 1: 30–37.
Amick, B., Levine, S., Tarlov, A. and Walsh, D. 
1995. Society and Health. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Aminzadeh, B., Motevali, M., and Nikooparast, S. 
2016. “A Proposal for Landscape Design Process 
Based on Scenario Writing Phases in Cinema 
and its Application in the Darabad Route, 
Tehran, Iran.” Urban Design International 21, 
no. 2: 175–189.
Anderson, S. (ed.) 1986. On Streets. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Ardalan, N. and Bakhtiar, L. 1973. The Sense of 
Unity: The Sufi Tradition in Persian Architecture. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Arnheim, R. 1969. Visual Thinking. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Arnold, H. 1991. Trees in Urban Design. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Ashihara, Y. 1970: Exterior Design in Architecture. 
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Auster, P. 1990. Moon Palace. New York: Penguin.
Avishay, A. 2018. “Gang Borders Create 
Invisible Walls in Los Angeles.” KCRW 
Housing & Development section (13 March). 
Viewed November 15, 2021. https://www.kcrw.
com/culture/shows/design-and-architecture/­
gang-borders-create-invisible-walls-in-los-­
angeles
Bacon, E. 1974. Design of Cities. New York: 
Viking.
Barnes, T. and Duncan, J. 1992. Writing Worlds: 
Discourse, Text, & Metaphor in the Representation 
of Landscape. New York: Routledge.
Barthes, R. 1972. “The New Citroen.” In 
Mythologies. New York: Hill and Wang: 88–90.
Barthes, R. 1979. The Eiffel Tower and Other 
Mythologies. Trans. by Richard Howard. New 
York: Hill & Wang: 3–18.
Barthes, R. 1982. “The Eiffel Tower.” In Sontag, 
S. (ed.) A Barthes Reader. New York: Hill and 
Wang: 136–150.
Basinger, J. 2019. Movie Musical. New York: 
Knopf Doubleday.
Baum, H. 1983. Planners and Public Expectations. 
Cambridge, MA: Schenkman.
Beaver, F. 2009. Dictionary of Film Terms: The 
Aesthetic Companion to Film Art. 4th editon. 
New York: Peter Lang.
Beecher, C. and Stowe, H. B. 1987. American 
Woman’s Home, or Principles of Domestic Science. 
Hartford, CT: Stowe-Day Foundation.
Benzel, K. 1998. The Room in Context: Design 
beyond Boundaries. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Berendt, J. 1994. Midnight in the Garden of Good 
and Evil. New York: Vintage.
Berger, A. 1998. “Archeological Space: Negotiating 
Narrative Content in the Landscape Continuum.” 
Landscape 
Review 
(Canterbury: 
Lincoln 
University) 4, no. 1: 3–15.
Berger, J. and Sinton, J. 1985. Water, Earth, and 
Fire: Land Use and Environmental Planning in the 
278
New Jersey Pine Barrens. Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Berger, P. 1963. Invitation to Sociology: A 
Humanistic Perspective. New York: Doubleday.
Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. 1967. The Social 
Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology 
of Knowledge. New York: Doubleday.
Berleant, A. 2005. “Ideas for a Social Aesthetic.” 
In Light, A. and Smith, J. (eds.) The Aesthetics of 
Everyday Life. New York: Columbia University 
Press: 23–38.
Berry, W. 1964. The Broken Ground. Harcourt 
Brace & World.
Berry, W. 1968. Openings. New York: Harcourt, 
Brace & World.
Berry, W. 1969. The Long-legged House. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace & World.
Berry, W. 1981. “A Country of Edges.” In Berry, 
W. (ed.) Recollected Essays, 1965–1980. San 
Francisco, CA: North Point: 223–229.
Berry, W. 2000. Life is a Miracle. Washington, D.C.: 
Counterpoint.
Berry, W. 2013. The Country of Marriage. Berkeley, 
CA: Counterpoint. Reprint edition.
Bloomer, K. and Moore, C. 1977. Body, Mind, and 
Architecture. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
Bonta, J. 1979. Architecture and Its Interpretation: 
A Study of Expressive Systems in Architecture. 
New York: Rizzoli.
Borges, J. L. 1962. Ficciones. Trans. by Emece 
Editores. New York: Grove Press.
Boyer, E. and Mitgang, L. 1996. Building 
Community: A New Future for Architectural 
Education and Practice. Princeton, NJ: The 
Carnegie Foundation.
Boyle, B. 1977. “Architectural Practice in America 
1986-1965- Ideal and Reality.” In The Architect, 
ed. S. Kostof. New York: Oxford University 
Press: 309–344.
Brady, E. 2005. “Sniffing and Savoring: The 
Aesthetics of Smells and Tastes.” In Light, A. and 
Smith, J. (eds.) The Aesthetics of Everyday Life. 
New York: Columbia University Press: 177–193.
Bring, M. and Wayembergh, J. 1981. Japanese 
Gardens: Design and Meaning. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Bronowski, J. 1973. The Ascent of Man. Boston, 
MA: Little, Brown & Company.
Burger, D. 1965. Sphereland: A Fantasy about 
Curved Spaces and an Expanding Universe. 
Trans. Cornelie Rheinbolt. New York: Harper 
& Rowe.
Buttimer, A. 1980. “Social Space and the 
Planning of Residential Areas.” In Buttimer, A. 
and Seamon, D. (eds.) The Human Experience of 
Space and Place. London: Croom Helm, 21–54.
Calvino, I. 1968. Cosmicomics. New York: 
Harcourt Brace & Company.
Calvino, I. 1974. Invisible Cities. Trans. William 
Weaver. San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich.
Campbell, J. 1949. The Hero with a Thousand 
Faces. New York: Pantheon.
Campbell, J. 1969. The Masks of God: Primitive 
Mythology. New York: Penguin.
Campbell, J. 1968. The Masks of God: Creative 
Mythology. New York: Penguin.
Campbell, J. 1974. The Mythic Image. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Canadian Geographic. (2015). “Sabrina Doyle” 
(December 2). Viewed March 2022. https://
www.canadiangeographic.ca/article/geography- 
word-week-palimpsest#:~:text=%5BPAL% 
2Dimp%2Dsest%5D,traces%20of%20something%20preceding%20it.
Canemaker, J. 1999. Paper Dreams: The Art and 
Artists of Disney Storyboards. New York: Hyperion.
Capra, F. 1982. The Turning Point: Science, Society, 
and the Rising Culture. New York: Simon and 
Schuster.
Chatman, S. 1980. Story and Discourse: Narrative 
Structure in Fiction and Film. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell.
Chatman, S. 1990. Coming to Terms: The Rhetoric of 
Narrative in Fiction and Film. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
Ching, F. D. K. 1978. Architecture: Space, Form, 
and Order. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Church, T. 1983. Gardens are for People. New 
York: Reinhold.
Collins, G. and Collins, C.C. 1986: Camillo Sitte: 
The Birth of Modern City Planning. New York: 
Rizzoli.
279
Conron, J. 1974. The American Landscape: A 
Critical Anthology of Prose and Poetry. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Conron, J. 1985. Fitz Hugh Lane and the 
American Picturesque.” Revue Francaise d’Etudes 
Americines, (November): 383–401.
Conron, J. 2000. American Picturesque. University 
Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Conzen, M. (ed.) 1990. The Making of the 
American Landscape. London: Harper Collins 
Academic.
Cooper, A. 2020. A Most Beautiful Thing. New 
York: Flatiron Press.
Cooper, J. F. 1980. The Last of the Mohicans. New 
York: Penguin.
Cornish, J. 2019. Dementia with Dignity: Living 
Well with Alzheimer’s or Dementia using the 
DAWN Method. Amazon eBook: rdp.com.
Cosgrove, D. 1984. Social Formation and Symbolic 
Landscape. London: Croom Helm.
Cronon, W. 1983. Changes in the Land: Indians, 
Colonists and the Ecology of New England. New 
York: Hill and Wang.
Cronon, W. 1991. Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago 
and the Great West. New York: W.W. Norton.
Cuff, D, 1991. Architecture: The Story of Practice. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cullen, G. 1961. Townscape. New York: Reinhold.
Deetz, J. 1977. In Small Things Forgotten: The 
Archeology of Early American Life. New York: 
Anchor.
Derrida, J. 1978. Writing and Difference. Trans. by 
Bass, Ala. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Didion, J. 1979. “Many Mansions.” In Didion, 
J. (ed.) The White Album. New York: Pocket 
Books: 67–73.
Dillard, A. 1990. Three by Annie Dillard. New 
York: Harper Perennial.
Domosh, M. 1996. Inventing Cities: The Creation 
of Landscape in Nineteenth-century New York and 
Boston. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Dondis, D. 1973. A Primer of Visual Literacy. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dos Passos, J. 1953. Manhattan Transfer. Boston: 
Mariner Books.
Downing, A. J. 1841. A Treatise on the Theory 
and Practice of Landscape Gardening, Adapted to 
North America. New York: Wiley and Putnam. 
Digital Collection, UMass Amherst. Viewed 
February 2020. https://archive.org/details/treatiseontheory41down/page/n8/mode/2up
Downing, A. J. 1969. The Architecture of Country 
Houses. New York: Dover.
Downs, R. and Stea, D. 1973. Image and 
Environment. Cognitive Mapping and Spatial 
Behavior. Aldine, Chicago.
Duncan, J. 1990. The City as Text: The Politics of 
Landscape Interpretation in the Kandyan Kingdom. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Duncan, J. and Ley, D. (eds.) 1993. Place/
Culture/Representation. New York: Routledge.
Dunlop, D. 2020. “A Brief History of Clouds.” 
Viewed May 2020. https://www.paintingclass.
net/a-brief-history-of-clouds-chapter-i/
Durrell, L. 1969. Spirit of Place: Letters and Essays 
on Travel. New Haven, CT: Leete’s Island 
Books.
Eckstein, B. and Throgmorton, J. 2003. Story and 
Sustainability: Planning, Practice, and Possibility 
for American Cities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Eco, U. 1994. Six Walks in the Fictional Woods. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Edwards, B. 1999. The New Drawing on the 
Right Side of the Brain: A Course in Enhancing 
Creativity and Artistic Confidence. New York: 
Distributed by St. Martin’s Press.
Eiseley, L. 1957: The Immense Journey. New York: 
Vintage.
Eiseley, L. 1978. “The Innocent Fox.” In Eiseley, 
L. The Star Thrower. New York: Time Books: 
26–36.
Eliot, T. S. 1963. “Little Gidding.” In Collected 
Poems 1909–1962: T. S. Eliot. New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich: 202–209.
Emerson, R. W. 1971. Nature, Addresses, and Lec­
tures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Evernden, N. 1992. The Social Creation of Nature. 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ewen, S. 1976: Captains of Consciousness: 
Advertising and the Social Roots of the Consumer 
Culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ewert, E. 1999. “Setting the Pacific Northwest 
Stage: 
The 
Influence 
of 
the 
Natural 
Environment.” In Goble, D. and Hirt, P. (Eds.), 
280
Northwest Lands, Northwest Peoples: Readings in 
Environmental History. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press. 1–26.
Faris, W. 1988. Labyrinths of Language: Symbolic 
Landscape and Narrative Design in Modern Fiction. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Farrel, B. and Farrel, P. 2001. Men are Like Waffles, 
Women are Like Spaghetti. Eugene, OR: Harvest 
House.
Fisher, T. 2013. The Ethics of Landscape. Landscape 
Architecture Frontiers, 1, no. 2: 44–51.
Forester, J. 1985. “Critical Theory and Planning 
Practice.” In Forester, J. (ed.) Critical Theory 
and Public Life. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 
202–230.
Forester, J. 1989. Planning in the Face of Power. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Forman, R. and Godron, M. 1986. Landscape 
Ecology. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Foster, J. 2009. “Environmental aesthetics, ecological action and social justice.” In Bondi, L., 
Cameron, L. Davidson, J. and Smith, M. (eds.) 
Emotion, Place and Culture. Aldershot, England: 
Ashgate Press: 97–114.
Fowles, J. 1965. The Magus. New York, NY: Dell.
Fowles, J. 1979. The Tree. Don Mills, Ontario, 
CA: Collins.
Gans, H. 1962. The Urban Villagers: Group and 
Class in the Life of Italian Americans. New York: 
The Free Press.
Garfinkel, H. 1963. “A Conception of and 
Experiments with ‘Trust’ as a Condition of 
Stable Concerted Actions.” In Harvey, O. J. 
(ed.) Motivation and Social Interaction. New 
York: Ronald Press: 187–238.
Genette, G. 1980. Narrative Discourse: An Essay in 
Method. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Gibson, J. J. 1979. The Ecological Approach to 
Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Giddens, A. 1979. Central Problems in Social 
Theory. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Giddens, A. 1984. The Constitution of Society. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Girouard, M. 1978. Life in the English Country 
House. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Goffman, E. 1963. Behavior in Public Places: Notes 
on the Social Organization of Gatherings. New 
York: Free Press.
Goffman, E. 1959. The Presentation of Self in 
Everyday Life. New York: Doubleday.
Golden/La Jolla, F. 1999: “Lying Faces Unmasked: 
The Most Gifted Fibbers Can Fool Almost 
Anybody, But a New Computer Can Look Right 
Through Them.” In Time Magazine, Science 
section. New York: Time Life. April 5, 1999: 153, 
no.13.
Goldhagen, S. W. 2017. Welcome to Your World: 
How the Built Environment Shapes Our Lives. 
New York: Harper Collins.
Goldsworthy, A. 1990. Collaboration with Nature. 
New York: Abrams.
Goldsworthy, A. 2015. Ephemeral Works: 2004–
2014. New York: Abrams.
Golledge, R. 1999: “Human Wayfinding and 
Cognitive Maps.” In Golledge, R. (ed.) 
Wayfinding 
Behavior: 
Cognitive 
Mapping 
and Spatial Processes. Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press: 5–45.
Gombrich, E. H. 1972. Art and Illusion: A Study 
in the Psychology of Pictorial Representation. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Goode, W. 1957. “Community within a 
Community: 
The 
Professions.” 
American 
Sociological Review, 22, no. 2: 194–200.
Goodman, P. 1954. The Structure of Literature. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
GoodTheraphy, 2019. Collective Unconscious. 
Viewed December 18, 2020. https://www.
goodtherapy.org/blog/psychpedia/collective- 
unconscious#:~:text=The%20collective%20
unconscious%20is%20a, of%20universal%20
figures%20and%20relationships.
Gordon, W. 1961. Synectics. New York: 
Macmillan.
Gottdiener, M. 1985. The Social Production of 
Urban Space. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Gratz, R. 1989. The Living City. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
Gray, J. 1992. Men Are from Mars, Women Are 
from Venus: A Practical Guide for Improving 
Communication and Getting What You Want 
in Your Relationships. New York: Harper 
Collins.
Greene, H. 1962. Mind & Image: An Essay on 
Art and Architecture. Lexington: University of 
Kentucky Press.
281
Grove, N. 1990. “Greenways, Paths to the Future.” 
National Geographic. 177, no. 6: 93–94.
Guilpin, W. 1792. Three Essays: On Picturesque 
Beauty. London: Printed for R. Blamire.
Guilpin, W. 1802. An Essay on Prints. London: 
Straham, Codell, and Davies.
Guth, H. 1961: Concise English Handbook. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Haapala, A. 2005. “Ideas for a Social Aesthetic.” 
In Light, A. and Smith, J. (eds.) The Aesthetics of 
Everyday Life. New York: Columbia University 
Press: 23–38.
Habermas, J. 1970. Towards a Rational Society. 
Boston: Beacon.
Habermas, J. 1979. Communication and the 
Evolution of Society. Trans. McCarthy, T., Boston: 
Beacon.
Harbermas, J. 1981. The Theory of Communicative 
Action: Reason and the Rationalization of Society. 
Boston: Beacon.
Hagerstrand, T. 1970. “What about People in 
Regional Science?” Papers of the Regional Science 
Association 24, no. 1: 621.
Hall, E. 1969. The Hidden Dimension: An 
Anthropologist Examines Man’s Use of Space in 
Public and in Private. New York: Doubleday.
Hall, E. 1981. The Silent Language. New York: 
Anchor.
Hall, E. 1983. The Dance of Life: The Other 
Dimension of Time. Garden City, NJ:  
Anchor.
Halprin, L. and Burns, J. 1974. Taking Part: A 
Workshop Approach to Collective Creativity. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harington, D. 1986. Let Us Build a City. San 
Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Hartshorne, R. 1939. The Nature of Geography: A 
Critical Survey of Current Thought in Light of the 
Past. Lancaster, PA: Association of American 
Geographers.
Hawken, P. 1993. The Ecology of Commerce: A 
Declaration of Sustainability. New York: Harper 
Collins.
Hayden, D. 1995. The Power of Place: Urban 
Landscapes as Public History. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Hester, R. 2006. Design for Ecological Democracy. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Heuer, K. (ed.) 1987. The Lost Notebooks of 
Loren Eiseley. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and 
Company.
Horton, T. 1987. Bay Country: Reflections on the 
Chesapeake. New York: Ticknor & Fields.
Horton, T. 2002. The Great Marsh: An Intimate 
Journey into a Chesapeake Wetland. Baltimore, 
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hough, M. 1990. Out of Place: Restoring Identity 
to the Regional Landscape. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Howard, B. 2014. “Buried Stream Sees the Light 
of Day” (November 27, 2014). Viewed May 
2020. 
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/
news/2014/11/141125-dc-daylighting-broadbranch-stream-restoration-science/
Hughes, B. 1997. Narrative as Landscape. Presented 
at the Meno Workshop on Hypermedia and 
Narrative. Brighton UK April 1997. Viewed May 
2020 http://www.dustormagic.net/NasL.html.
Integrus 
Architecture. 
2019. 
Educational 
Specifications, Spokane Public Schools, On Track 
Academy. Spokane, WA: Integrus Architecture. 
Project No. 21838.00.
Itoh, T. 1981. Space & Illusion: In the Japanese 
Garden. New York: Weatherhill/Tankosha.
Jackson, J. B. 1970. “The Stranger’s Path.” In 
Zube, E. (ed.) Landscapes: Selected Writings 
of J. B. Jackson. Amherst, MA: University of 
Massachusetts Press: 92–106.
Jackson, J. B. 1977. “Ghosts at the Door.” In 
Zube, E. and Zube, M. (eds.) Changing of 
Rural Landscapes. Amherst, MA: University 
Massachusetts Press: 41–52.
Jackson, J. B. 1994. A Sense of Place, a Sense of 
Time. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Jacobs, J. 1961. The Death and Life of Great 
American Cities. New York: Vintage.
Jauchius, J. 2017. Landscape for Autism: How 
Nature-based Play and Learning Environments 
Benefit ASD. Spokane, WA: SPVV.
Jewett, S.O. 1956. The Country of the Pointed Firs 
and Other Stories. Garden City, NY: Doubleday 
& Company.
Johnson, B. 1982. Ojibway Ceremonies. Lincoln, 
NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Johnson, N. B. 1982. “Education as Environmental 
Socialization: Classroom Spatial Patterns and 
282
the Transmission of Sociocultural Norms.” 
Anthropology Quarterly 55, no. 1: 31–43.
Johnston, R.J., Gregory, D., Haggett, P., Smith, D., 
and Stoddart, D.R. (eds.) 1981. The Dictionary 
of Human Geography. Oxford: Blackwell.
Jordanova, L. (ed.) 1986. Languages of Nature: 
Critical Essays on Science and Literature. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers.
Juster, N. 1963. The Dot and the Line: A Romance 
in Lower Mathematics. New York: Random 
House.
Kandinsky, W. 1979. Point and Line to Plane. 
New York: Dover.
Kearns, R. and Gesler, W. (eds.) 1998. Putting 
Health into Place: Landscape, Identity, And 
Well-Being. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University 
Press.
Kemmis, D. 1990. Community and the Politics of 
Place. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma 
Press. 
Kemmis, D. 1995. The Good City and the Good 
Life: Renewing the Sense of Community. New 
York: Houghton Mifflin.
Kendig, 
L. 
1980. 
Performance 
Zoning. 
Washington, DC: Planners Press, American 
Planning Association.
Knapp, B. 1986. Archetype, Architecture, and the 
Writer. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 
Press.
Kooser, T. 2005. The Poetry Home Repair Manual: 
Practical Advice for Beginning Poets. Lincoln, 
NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Kuo, F. and Taylor, A. 2004. “A Potential Natural 
Treatment for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder.” American Journal of Public Health 
94, no. 9: 1580–1586.
Kryder-Reid, E. 1996. “The Construction of 
Sanctity: Landscape and Ritual in a Religious 
Community.” In Yamin, R. and Metheny, K. B. 
(eds.) 1996. Landscape Archaeology: Reading and 
Interpreting the American Historical Landscape. 
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 228–
248.
Kuhn, T. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolu­
tions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. 1987. Women, Fire, and Dangerous 
Things. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lamott, A. 1994. Bird by Bird: Some Instructions 
on Writing and Life. New York: Anchor.
Langer, S. 1967. Mind: An Essay on Human Feeling. 
Volume 1. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press.
Langer, S. 1980. Philosophy in a New Key: A 
Study in the Symbolism of Reason, Rite, and Art. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lao Tse, 1948. The Wisdom of Laotse. Lin Yutang 
(ed.). New York: Modern Library pub. By 
Random House.
Lao Tzu, 1955. The Way of Life: Tao Te Ching. 
Trans. Blakney, R.B. New York: Mentor.
Lao Tzu, 1963. Tao Te Ching. Trans. Lau, D. C. 
New York: Penguin.
Larson, M. S. 1977. The Rise of Professionalism: 
A Sociological Analysis. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Laseau, P. 1980. Graphic Thinking for Architects and 
Designers. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Lawrence, D. H. 2007. “Sketches from Etruscan 
Places.” In Lawrence, D. H. (ed.) D. H. 
Lawrence and Italy. London, England: Penguin. 
327–441.
Lefebvre, H. 1976: “Reflections on the Politics of 
Space.” Antipode. 8(2) 30–37.
Lefebvre, H. 1979. “Space: Social Product and 
Use Value.” In Freiberg, J.W. Critical Social 
Theory: European Perspectives. New York: John 
Wiley and Sons, 285–295.
Lefebvre, H. 1994. The Production of Space. 
Trans. Nicholson-Smith, D. Cambridge, MA: 
Blackwell.
Le Guin, U. 1974. The Dispossessed. New York: Avon.
Leone, M. 2015. The Archaeology of My Own 
Ignorance: Excavations in Annapolis. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Ley, D. 1974. The Black Inner City as Frontier 
Outpost: Images and Behavior of a Philadelphia 
Neighborhood. Washington, DC: Association of 
American Geographers.
Ley, D. 1983. A Social Geography of the City. New 
York: Harper & Row.
Light, A. and Smith, J. (eds.) 2005. The Aesthetics 
of Everyday Life. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Lincoln University Press. 1996. Theme: Languages 
of Landscape Architecture – Theory into Practice 
(Canterbury, NZ) 2, no. 3: 1.
Lippard, L. 1983. Overlay: Contemporary Art and 
the Art of Prehistory. New York: Pantheon Books.
283
Lopez, B. 1987. Arctic Dreams: Imagination and Desire 
in a Northern Landscape. New York: Bantam.
Lopez, B. 2004. Vintage Lopez. New York: Vintage.
Lopez, B. 2019. Horizons. New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf.
Lowenthal, D. and Bowden, M. 1976. Geographies 
of the Mind. New York: Oxford  University Press.
Lund, K. 2012. “Landscapes and Narratives: 
Compositions 
and 
the 
Walking 
Body.” 
Landscape Research. 37, no. 2: 225–237.
Lutwack, L. 1984. The Role of Place in Literature. 
Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.
Lynch, K. 1960. Image of the City. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Lynch, K. 1971. Site Planning. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Lynch, K. 1972. What Time is this Place? 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lynch, K. and Hack, G. 1989. Site Planning. 
Third Edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lynes, R. 1954. The Taste-Makers. New York: 
Harper & Brothers.
Mann, W. 1993. Landscape Architecture: An 
Illustrated History in Timelessness, Site Plans, and 
Biography. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Marcus, C. C. 1995: House as a Mirror of Self. 
Berkeley, CA: Conari.
Marcus, C. C. 1999. Healing Gardens: Therapeutic 
Benefits and Design Recommendations. New 
York: John Wiley.
Marx, L. 1981. The Machine in the Garden: 
Technology and the Pastoral Ideal of America. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Maslow, A. 1970. Motivation and Personality. 3rd 
edition. New York: Harper and Row.
McKim, R. 1972. Experiences in Visual Thinking. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
McPhee, J. 1968. The Pine Barrens. New York: 
Farrar. Strauss and Giroux.
McPhee, J. 2000. Annals of the Former World. New 
York: Macmillan.
Meinig, D. W. 1979. “The Beholding Eye: Ten 
Versions of the Same Scene. In Meinig, D. W. 
and Jackson, J. B. (eds.) The Interpretation of 
Ordinary Landscapes: Geographical Essays. New 
York: Oxford University Press: 33–48.
Mitchell, W. J. T. 1981. On Narrative. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Michener, J. 1965. The Source. New York: Fawcett.
Mollison, B. 1988. Permaculture: A Designer’s 
Manual. Tyalgum, Australia: Tagari.
Moore, C., Mitchell, W., and Turnbull, W. 1988. 
The Poetics of Gardens. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Moreno, L. 2012. “A Review of ‘Henri Lefebvre 
on Space: Architecture, Urban Research and the 
Production of Theory.’ ” Annals of the Association 
of American Geographers 102, no. 4: 885–890.
Morgan, F. 2006. The Power of Community: How 
Cuba Survived Peak Oil. DVD, 53 minutes. 
Yellow Springs, Ohio: Community Service Inc.
Morris, W. 1970. The American Heritage 
Dictionary of the English Language. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin.
Motloch, J. 1991. Introduction to Landscape 
Design. New York: van Nostrand Reinhold.
Moughtin, C. 2003. Urban Design: Street and 
Square. 3rd edition. New York: Elsevier.
Muir, J. 1997. Nature Writings. New York: Literary 
Classics.
Muir, J. 1988. Wilderness Essays. Salt Lake City, 
UT: Peregrine.
Nabham, G. 1993. In “The Foreword.” Thoreau 
H. D. Faith in a Seed. Washington, D.C.: 
Shearwater. xvi.
Nabokov, P. and Easton, R. 1989. Native American 
Architecture. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nash, R. 1989. Rights of Nature. Madison: 
University of Wisconsin.
Ndubisi, F. 1988. “Community Planning for 
Amerindian Cultures: A Phenomenological 
Approach.” Landscape Architecture 78, no. 7: 
88–90.
Nesbitt, P., Pond, A., and Allen, W. 1959. The 
Survival Book. Princeton, NJ: van Nostrand.
Newman, O. 1972. Defensible Space: Crime 
Prevention through Urban Design. New York: 
The Macmillan Company.
Newton, N. 1971. Design on the Land. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Norberg-Schulz, C. 1985. The Concept of 
Dwelling: On the Way to Figurative Architecture. 
New York: Rizzoli.
Norberg-Schulz, C. 1980. Genius Loci: Towards a 
Phenomenology of Architecture. New York: Rizzoli.
Novak, B. 1980. Nature and Culture: American 
Landscape and Painting, 1825–1875. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
284
Pace Gallery, 1993. Drawing into Film: Directors’ 
Drawings. New York: The Pace Gallery.
Parsons, T. 1964. “Evolutionary Universals in 
Society.” American Sociological Review 29, no. 
3: 339–357.
Philips, S. 1982. “The Language Socialization 
of Lawyers: Acquiring the ‘Cant’.” In Spinder, 
G. (ed.) Doing the Ethnography of Schooling: 
Educational Anthropology in Action. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston: 176–209.
Piaget, J. and Inhelder, B. 1967. The Child’s 
Conception of Space. New York: Norton Library.
Pinkham, R. 2000. Daylighting: New Life 
for Buried Streams. Snowmass, CO: Rocky 
Mountain Institute.
Poe, E. A. 1904. The Works of Edgar Allen Poe, 
Volume Six. Tales – Horror and Death. New 
York: Funk & Wagnalls.
Pollan, M. 1991. Second Nature: A Gardener’s 
Education. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.
Potteiger, M. and Purinton, J. 1998. Landscape 
Narratives: Design Practices for Telling Stories. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Prince, G. 1970. The Practice of Creativity. New 
York: Macmillan.
Rae, C. M. 1996. Movies of the Mind: How to 
Build a Short Story. Santa Fe, NM: Sherman 
Asher.
Rapoport, A. 1969. House Form and Culture. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Rapoport, A. 1982. The Meaning of the Built 
Environment: A Nonverbal Communication 
Approach. Beverly Hills: Sage.
Raver, A. 1993. “In Georgia’s Swept Yards, a 
Dying Tradition.” New York Times, August 8, 
1993, Section 1, Page 1.
Reid, G. 1987. Landscape Graphics. New York: 
Whitney Library of Design.
Relph, E. 1987. The Modern Urban Landscape. 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press.
Reps, J. 1969. Town Planning in Frontier America. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Repton, H. 1794. Sketches and Hints on Landscape 
Gardening. London, Printed by W. Bulmer and 
Co. 
http://digital.library.wisc.edu/1711.dl/
DLDecArts.ReptonSketches
Repton, H. 1803. “Theory and Practice of 
Landscape Gardening.” In Loudon, J. C. 
(ed.), The Landscape Gardening and Landscape 
Architecture of the late Humphry Repton, Esq.: 
London, 1840.
Roberts, A. 2018. Churchill: Walking with Destiny. 
eBook. New York: Viking.
Rose, T. 2016. The End of Average: How We 
Succeed in a World that Values Sameness. New 
York: Harper One.
Rosenthal, S. and Bourgeois, P. 1990. “Mead 
and Merleau-Ponty: meaning, perception, 
and behavior.” In Tymieniecka, A. (ed.) The 
Moral Sense and Its Foundational Significance: 
Self, 
Person, 
Historicity, 
Community, 
Phenomenological Praxeology, and Psychiatry. 
Boston: Kluwer Academic: 401–409.
Rowe, J. and Kahn, R. 1998. Successful Aging. 
New York: Random House.
Rowles, G. 1978. The Prisoners of Space? Exploring 
the Geographical Experience of Older People. 
Boulder CO: Westview.
Rowles, G. and Bernard, M. 2013. “The 
Meaning and Significance of Place in Old 
Age.” In Rowles, G. and Bernard, M. (eds.) 
Environmental Gerontology: Making Meaningful 
Places in Old Age. New York: Springer: 3–24.
Rubin, D. 1995. Memory in Oral Traditions: 
The Cognitive Psychology of Epic, Ballads, and 
Counting-out Rhymes. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Rudofsky, B. 1969. Streets Are for People: a primer 
for Americans. Garden City, NY: Double Day.
Ruskin, J. 1859. The True and the Beautiful in 
Nature: Art, Morals, and Religion. New York: 
Wiley & Halsted.
Rybczynski, W. 1986. A Short History of the Idea of 
Home. New York: Viking.
Samuels, M. 1978. “Existentialism and Human 
Geography.” In Ley, D. and Samuels, M. (eds.) 
Humanistic Geography: Prospects and Problems. 
Chicago, IL: Maaroufa.
Sartre, J. 1966. Being and Nothingness. New York: 
Washington Square Press.
Sauer, C. 1925. “The Morphology of Landscape.” 
Reprinted in Leighly, J. (ed.) 1974: Land and 
Life: A Selection from the Writings of Carl Ortwin 
285
Sauer. Berkeley: University of California Press: 
315–350.
Scarfo, R. 1987. “Misstructuring the Structure of 
Design Education.” In Proceedings, Council of 
Educators in Landscape Architecture: 389–396.
Scarfo, R. 1988. “Stewardship and the Profession 
of Landscape Architecture.” Landscape Journal 
7, no. 1: 60–68.
Scarfo, R. 1989. Transforming the Meaning 
of Space: The Socialization of Professional 
Landscape Architects. Ph.D. Dissertation, 
Geography Department, Clark University, 
Worcester, MA.
Scarfo, B. 1989a. “Consensus: The Aim of Teaching 
and Learning.” In Proceedings, Council of Educators 
in Landscape Architecture, Gainesville, Florida: 
59–64.
Scarfo, B. 1992. “Ethics in Practice: What We 
Say and What We Do, “ Landscape Architecture 
Review 13, no. 3/4: 6–8.
Schama, S. 1995. Landscape and Memory. New 
York: Alfred Knopf.
Schmidt, J. 1975. Urban Development: a review and 
Chicago Case Study. Department of Geography, 
Research Paper 161. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Schon, D. 1983. The Reflective Practitioner. New 
York: Basic Books.
Sharpe, W. and Wallock, L. (eds.) 1987. Visions 
of the Modern City: Essays in History, Art, and 
Literature. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.
Sieber, T. 1979. “Schoolrooms, Pupils, and 
Rules: The Role of Informality in Bureaucratic 
Socialization.” Human Organization 38, no. 3: 
273–282.
Simonds, J. O. 1961. Landscape Architecture: A 
Manual of Site Planning and Design. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Simonds, J. O. 2006. Landscape Architecture: 
A Manual of Site Planning and Design. 4th 
edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sitte, C. 1945. The Art of Building Cities. Trans. 
Stewart, C. Westport, CT: Hyperion Press.
Smith, N. 1984. Uneven Development: Nature, 
Capital, and the Production of Space. New York: 
Basil Blackwell.
Smith, P. 1977. The Syntax of Cities. London: 
Hutchinson.
Smithson, R. 1996. Robert Smithson: The 
Collected Writings. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Smitten, J. and Daghistany, A. (Eds.) 1981. 
Spatial Form in Narrative. Ithaca: Cornell 
University.
Snyder, G. 1996. Mountains and Rivers without 
End. Washington, D. C.: Counterpoint.
Solnit, R. 2000. Wanderlust: A History of Walking. 
New York: Penguin.
Sommer, R. 1969. Personal Space: The Behavioral 
Basis of Design. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall.
Sommer, R. 1974. Tight Spaces: Hard Architecture 
and How To Humanize It. Englewood Cliffs, 
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Sontag, S. (ed.) 1994. A Barthes Reader. New 
York: Hill and Wang.
Sorvig, K. 1996.” Linguistics and the ‘Language’ 
of Design.” Landscape Review, Canterbury, NZ: 
Lincoln University Press, 2(3): 2–12.
Spirn, A. W. 1984. The Granite Garden: Urban 
Nature and Human Design. New York: Basic 
Books.
Spirn, A. 1998. The Language of Landscape. New 
Haven, CT.: Yale University Press.
Sternberg, E. 2009. Healing Spaces: The 
Science  of Place and Well-Being. Cambridge: 
Harvard.
Stevens, A. 1982. Archetypes: A Natural History 
of the Self. New York: William Morrow and 
Company.
Storr, A. 1983. The Essential Jung. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Storr, A. 1988. Solitude: A Return to Self. New 
York: The Free Press.
Swaffield, S. 1995. “Theme: Languages of Landscape 
Architecture.” Landscape Review: Journal of 
Landscape Architecture – South Pacific. 2.
Swaffield, S. 1996. Theme: Languages of 
Landscape Architecture – Theory into Practice. 
Landscape 
Review: 
Journal 
of 
Landscape 
Architecture – South Pacific. 2, no. 3.
Tara, A., Lawson, G., and Renata, A. 2021. 
Measuring Magnitude of Change by High286
rise Buildings in Visual Amenity Conflicts in 
Brisbane. In Elsevier, Landscape and Urban 
Planning 205 (2021) 103930.
Thiel, P. 1961. “A Sequence-Experience Notation: 
For Architectural and Urban Spaces.” The Town 
Planning Review 32, no. 1: 33–52.
Thiis—Evensen, 1987. Archetypes in Architecture. 
Oslo: Norwegian University Press.
Thoreau, H. D. 1973. Walden. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Thoreau, H. 1993. Faith in a Seed. Washington, 
DC: Island Press.
Tippett, K. 2016. Becoming Wise: An Inquiry into 
the Mystery and Art of Living. eVersion. New 
York: Penguin.
Treib, M. 1991. “Sources of Significance: 
The Garden in Our Time.” In Wrede, S. 
and Adams, W. A. (eds.) Denatured Visions: 
Landscape and Culture in the Twentieth 
Century. New York, NY: The Museum of 
Modern Art: 106–109.
Tuan, Yi-fu, 1974. Topophilia: A Study of 
Environmental Perceptions, Attitudes, and Values. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Tuan, Yi-fu. 1978. “Space, Time, Place: A 
Humanistic Frame.” In Carlstein, T., Parkes, 
D., and Thrift, N. J. Timing Space and Spacing 
Time. London: Edward Arnold. Vol. I: 7–16.
Tumminello, W. 2005. Exploring Storyboarding: 
An In-Depth Guide to the Art and Techniques of 
Contemporary Storyboarding. Clifton Park, NY: 
Thomson Delmar Learning.
Turner, V. 1980. “Social Dramas and Stories about 
Them.” Critical Inquiry 7, no. 1: 141–168.
Turner, V. 1981. Social Dramas and Stories about 
Them. In Mitchell, W. J. T. (ed.) On Narrative. 
Chicago: Chicago University Press, 137–163.
Twain, M. 1984. Life on the Mississippi. New 
York: Penguin.
Vernon, N. D. 1987. “Toward Defining the 
Profession: The Development of the Code of 
Ethics and the Standards of Professional Practice 
of the American Society of Landscape Architects, 
1899–1927.” Landscape Journal 6, no.1: 13–20.
Vitruvius, 1960. Vitruvius: The Ten Books on 
Architecture. Trans. Morgan, M. H. New York: 
Dover.
Vogler, C. 1992. The Writer’s Journey: Mythic 
Structure for Storytellers and Screenwriters. 
Studio City, CA: Michael Wiese Productions.
Waltower, S. 2019. “New Stop Sign on Grand Blvd. 
and High Drive Confuses Some Motorists.” 
Spokesman Review, November 6, 2019. Viewed 
February 2020. https://www.krem.com/article/
traffic/new-stop-sign-on-grand-blvd-and-highdr-confuses-some-drivers/293-3a2cc0f7-f23843f9-b346-6770536f690d.
Watts, M.T. 1975. Reading the Landscape of 
America. New York: Macmillan.
Way, D. 1973. Terrain Analysis: A Guide to 
Site 
Selection 
Using 
Aerial 
Photographic 
Interpretation. Stroudsburg, PA: Dowden, 
Hutchinson, & Ross.
Wester, L. 1990. Design Communication for 
Landscape Architects. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold.
Westmacott, R. 1992. African-American Gardens 
and Yards in the Rural South. Knoxville, TN: 
University of Tennessee Press.
Whyte, W. H. 2001. The Social Life of Small Urban 
Spaces. Ann Arbor, MI: Edward Brothers.
Wildlife Wonder. 2020. Darwin’s Thinking 
Path. Viewed July 2020. http://www.wildlifewonder.co.uk/darwins-thinking-path/#:~:text=While%20working%20on%20his%20
famous, as%20his%20’thinking%20path’.
Williams, W. C. 1965. Rain. In Alan, G. W., 
Rideout, W. and Robinson, J. American Poetry. 
New York: Harper & Row. 745–748.
Williams, R. 1973. The Country and the City. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Williams, R. 1983. Key words: a vocabulary of 
culture and society. New York: Oxford.
Willis, P. 1977. Learning to Labor: How Workingclass Kids Get Working Class Jobs. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Wing, R. L. 1979. The I Ching Workbook. New 
York: Doubleday.
Wikipedia, 2016. Structuralism. Viewed April 
24, 
2016. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Structuralism
Wittgenstein, L. 1958. Philosophical Investigations. 
Trans. 
Anscombe, 
G.E.M. 
New 
York: 
MacMillan.
287
Wolff, J. 1981. The Social Production of Art. New 
York: New York University Press.
Wolkomir, R. 1996. “Decibel by Decibel, 
Reducing the Din to a Very Dull Roar.” In 
Smithsonian 26, no. 11: 56.
Wong, W. 1972. Principles of Two-Dimensional 
Design. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Wong, W. 1977. Principles of Three—dimensional 
Design. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Wood, D. and Beck, R. 1994. Home Rules. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Yamin, R. and Metheny, K. B. (eds.) 1996. 
Landscape Archaeology: Reading and Interpreting 
The American Historical Landscape. Knoxville: 
University of Tennessee Press.
Young, D. 2015. “Charles Darwin’s Daily Walks.” 
Psychology Today. Viewed, July 2020, https://
www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/howthink-about-exercise/201501/charles-darwinsdaily-walks
Zube, E. and Zube, M. (eds.) 1977. Changing 
Rural Landscapes. Amherst, MA: University of 
Massachusetts Press.
Zimring, C., Joseph, A., Nicoll, G., and Tsepas, 
S. 2005. “Influences of Building Design and 
Site Design on Physical Activity.” Am. Journal 
of Preventive Medicine: Elsevier 28, no. 2S2: 
186–193.
Zucker, P. 1959. Town and Square. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
289
Index
Note: Italic page numbers refer to figures.
Abbott, David 218
Abbott, Edwin 105
Adams, James 52, 149, 239
aesthetics 162; collective 27; personal 27; sensual 
13, 70, 136, 148, 153, 238–239; visual 
12–13, 40–41, 45–52, 86–87, 133–135, 149, 
247–248
The Aesthetics of Everyday Life 160
Alexander, C. 21, 37, 56, 57, 96, 143, 151–154, 
159, 166
American Picturesque (Conron) 148
American Society of Landscape Architects 
(ASLA) 67, 252, 266–267; Code of 
Environmental Ethics 267; Code of 
Professional Ethics 14, 15, 253–255, 267; 
Constitution and Bylaws 14, 253–255; 
Professional Site Design and Planning Ethics 
268; Proposed Code of Site Design and 
Planning Ethics 267
American Studies 148
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)  
139, 254, 255
The Analogy 3–4; basic design 3, 4, 7, 8, 18, 20, 
23, 23–25; landscape design 3, 4, 7, 8, 18, 
20, 25–26; language 3, 4, 7, 8, 18, 20, 20–23; 
language as basis of 5; rationale behind 17–20; 
three-tiered 4, 5, 8, 16–35; word as point 6–7
Appalachian Trail 90
Archetype, Architecture, and the Writer  
(Knapp) 174
archetypes 5, 10, 11, 29, 42, 165–166, 174
Architectural Graphic Standard (AGS) 189–190
Architecture: Space, Form, and Order (Ching) 39
Arctic Dreams (Lopez) 274
Ardalan, N. 91, 124, 153
Arnold, H. 125, 127, 130, 141, 243
The Art of Building Cities: City Building According 
to Its Artistic Fundamentals (Sitte) 63
‘The Art of Memory’ (Yates) 218
Ashihara, Y. 64, 119, 123, 130, 132, 142, 243
assumptions 5, 13, 141–142, 200, 210, 
246–247, 253, 264, 268; designer-client 12; 
designers 254
Avatar 60
Bacon, E. 10, 14, 65, 74, 83, 84–85, 91, 152–
154, 163, 243
Bakhtiar, L. 91, 124, 153
Barnes, T. 34, 185
Baroque style 179
Barthes, Roland 60, 64
The Barthes Reader (Sontag) 42
basic design principles 5, 7, 50, 76
Bauer, Tony 266
Baum, H. 188, 189
Beck, R. 34, 43
beekeeper storyboards 232
Benzel, K. 14–15, 23, 74, 83, 109, 139
Berger, P. 197, 198
Berleant, Arnold 161–162
Bernard, M. 35
Berry, Wendell 33, 269, 272, 275
Bing 211
Bird by Bird (Lamott) 220
Bladerunner 201
book as volume: sequence of volumes 42, 119; 
serial vision 10, 119, 136, 146, 147, 150–151, 
153–154, 163
Borges, Jorge Luis 145–146
Boroditsky, Lera 105
borrowed landscape 15, 89; borrowed scenery 
89, 119, 126; ikedori 89; shakkei 89, 119, 126
boundaries 73, 77, 80, 86, 88, 96–97, 105; 
within design’s decisions 188; language 178; 
message 34; of perspective sketch 150; theme 
design 185
290
Burger, Dionys 106
“Buried Streams See the Light of Day”  
(Howard) 188
Burton, Tim 233
Buttimer, A. 44
CalPoly Pomona landscape architecture 221
Calthorpe, Peter 180
Calvino, Italo 59, 276
Campbell, Joseph 174
Canadian Studies 148
Carnegie Foundation 188
Chatani, Masahiro 141
Chatman, S. 183, 185, 193, 195
Chatman’s “reading out” 35
Chinatown 201
Ching, F. 39, 107, 122, 124
Church, Frederic Edwin 238, 238
Church, Thomas 119
Churchill, Winston 19
cinematography 180, 232
Circleville 178, 178
circulation: defined 5; forms of 97
Clemens, Samuel Langhorne 17
collective unconscious 10–11, 29–30, 34, 41, 75, 
148, 155, 254
communication 20–23; duality of 42–44; 
information and point(s) 57; theories 170
composition, and landscape narrative 228
Conceptual Blockbusting (Adams) 52, 149
“conceptual blocks” 149
Conron, John 28, 106–107, 119, 148, 183–184
consequentialist ethics 266
context-driven shapes 81–86
contingency 51, 92, 93
Corner, James 155
Cornish, Judy 98
Council of Landscape Architectural Registration 
Boards (CLARB) 252, 268
“A Country of Edges” (Berry) 273
Country of the Pointed Firs (Jewett) 10, 74, 169
crime prevention through environmental design 
(CPTED) 200
critical theory 182
Cuff, D. 188, 189
Cullen, G. 10, 64, 88, 89, 118–119,  
163, 243
The Dance of Life (Hall) 195
Darwin, Charles 86, 178; daily walk 86; problem 
solving 86
Darwin, Erasmus 178
“Daylighting: new life for buried streams” 
(Pinkham) 188
deconstruction 170, 195
descriptive narratives 12
design: criteria, for particular emotions 236–239; 
narratives 181
Design Communication for Landscape Architects 
(Wester) 117
designed landscapes 12, 13, 29, 135
designer-as-author 3–4, 15, 57; landscape-as-text 
3–5, 11, 15, 67, 164, 172, 197, 204, 210, 
266, 269; landscape narratives 153–154, 180; 
user-as-reader 3–4, 7, 15, 93–95, 112, 134, 
154, 184, 195, 206, 210
Design of Cities (Bacon) 14, 65, 152–153
Design on the Land: The Development of Landscape 
Architecture (Newton) 41
design principles: as applied to narrative 151–
153; as applied to volumetric space 151–153
design process 245; cohesive 6, 15, 30, 164, 185, 
191, 193–194, 203, 205; completeness 181, 
204, 241; contingency 92, 93; continuity 6, 
8–9, 14, 42, 58, 67, 84, 117, 126, 128, 132, 
134, 167, 183, 189, 194, 200–202; likely 
users’ anticipated experiences (expectations) 
204, 267; narrative 200–206; narrativestoryboard-design approach 11–13, 15, 25, 
155, 180, 190, 192, 203, 206, 210, 212, 
214, 224, 233, 241–242, 245–248, 263–264, 
266–267, 269; relating narrative structure 
to 188–190; typical 199–200; wholeness 15, 
180–181, 185–192, 194
design professionals 14, 29; American Society 
of Landscape Architects 14, 15, 67, 252, 
266–267; Code of Professional Ethics 14, 15, 
253–255, 267; socialization 14, 17, 259, 260; 
work in the service of others 29, 264–265
dialectic structure 145–148
dialog 74, 145, 147, 259
Dictionary of Film Terms (Beaver) 232
Dillard, Annie 33
The Dispossessed (Le Guin) 73, 86
D’Lugo, Marvin 28
291
Domains of Knowledge 181–182, 182
Domosh, Mona 178
The Dot and the Line (Juster) 49, 56
Downing, A. J. 33, 135
Downs, R. 105
Drawing into Film: Directors’ Drawings 233
Duany, Andrés 180
Duncan, J. 34, 185
Durand, Asher 102
Durrell, Lawrence 271, 275
Easton, R. 60
Ecological Approach to Visual Perception  
(Gibson) 239
edges 77, 97
“Education as Environmental Socialization: 
classroom spatial patterns and the transmission 
of social norms” (Johnson) 260
Edwards, Betty 80, 103, 209
Eiseley, Loren 3, 17, 33, 178, 269
Eisenhower, Dwight D. 74
elementary patterns 166
Elizabethan style 179
emerging professional society 253–257
Emerson, R. W. 33
Emotional Matrix 13, 24
Emotion Matrix exercise 236,  
236–237, 239
emotions, and design criteria 236–239
environmental aesthetics 160–161
environmental messages 30
environmental spaces 139
ephemeral earth art 271
epiphany 19, 211, 236, 245, 269
ethical responsibilities 264–267; Code of 
Professional Ethics 254; of landscape  
designers 13–14
ethics: background 251–253; close 267–268; 
consequentialist 266; designer’s power 258; 
emerging professional society 253–257; 
ethical responsibilities 264–267; in landscape 
architectural design practice 250–268; 
narrative-storyboard-design approach 
263–264; power, accepting 258; On Track 
Academy (OTA) 262–263
explicit landmarks 62
eye-level observations 127, 142
Faris, Wendy 41
Fellini, Federico 233
“a field of space” 122
figure-ground substance 86–88
Flatland (Abbott) 56, 105, 106
Fleming, Ron Lee 86–87
Fletcher, Giles 216
Forester, J. 188, 189
Forman, R. 112
four-dimensional landscape design 25, 82, 84
four-dimensional space 104, 140
four-dimensional world 106, 136, 139, 237
Fowles, John 27
Freud, Sigmund 180
Frost, Robert 30, 88
functionalism 196
functional messages 11, 30, 40, 42, 75, 93
Gans, H. 105
The Garden of the Forking Paths (Borges)  
145–146
Garfinkel, H. 44
geographical studies 148
Gibson, J. J. 215, 239, 240
Giddens, A. 34, 42–44, 184, 195–196
Gilliam, Terry 233
Godron, M. 112
Goffman, E. 44, 197
Goldsworthy, Andy 271
Google 211
Gotham 201
Gothic Romances 144
grammar and syntax 5, 7–8, 20–21, 23, 35, 
50, 76–77, 95–96, 148, 153, 171–172, 174, 
179–180
Great Wall of China 74
Greene, Herb 124
ground planes 101, 106–109; physical attributes 
109–116; warped 114
Haapala, Arto 162–163
Habermas, Jurgen 145, 195; Domains of 
Knowledge 181–182, 182
Hall, E. 105, 119, 130
Hall, Edward T. 195, 261
healing garden narratives 221–222
Healing Garden project 221–222, 229
292
Hero with a Thousand Faces (Campbell) 174
Hirshhorn Museum, Washington, D.C. 206
Hitchcock, Alfred 233
Horton, Tom 33
Howard, Brian 188
Hughes, B. 217–218
Huston, John 233
ikedori 89
Image of the City (Lynch) 25
Imperial Tea Garden 217–218
implicit and explicit forms 9–10, 19, 62, 67–68, 
68, 73, 75, 184, 201
Inception 201
Interdisciplinary Design Institute, Spokane,  
WA 263
Inventing Cities: The Creation of Landscape in 
Nineteenth-Century New York and Boston 
(Domosh) 178
Invisible Cities (Calvino) 276
Jackson, J. B. 73, 75, 275
Jacobs, Jane 142
Jewett, Sarah Orne 169–170
Jewett, S. O. 10, 74
Johnson, Basil 60
Johnson, Norris Brock 187, 260–261
Jung, Carl 10, 11, 30, 180
Jurassic Park 232
Juster, Norton 49
Kandinsky, W. 82, 83–84, 91
Kemmis, Daniel 31
Kiley, Dan 108
Knapp, Bettina 174
Kooser, Ted 12–13, 209–211, 214–217, 219, 
248, 257
Kübler-Ross, Elisabeth 227
Kuhn, T. 74
Kurosawa, Akira 233
Labyrinths of Language (Faris) 41
Lamott, Anne 12–13, 209, 220, 257; shitty first 
drafts 13, 220, 229, 241
landmarks: associated with spaces 65;  
explicit 62
Landscape Archaeology (Yamin and Metheny) 41
Landscape Architect Registration Examination 
(LARE) 201, 252, 268
Landscape Architectural Accreditation Board 
(LAAB) 254, 268
landscape architectural design practice: designer’s 
power 258; emerging professional society 
253–257; ethics in 250–268; On Track 
Academy (OTA) 262–263
Landscape Architecture: An Illustrated History in 
Timelines, Site Plans, and Biography (Mann) 41
landscape-as-narrative 12–15, 67, 206; place’s 
emotional content 41; vocabulary 39
landscape-as-text 3–5, 11, 15, 67, 164, 172, 197, 
204, 210, 266, 269
landscape design concepts 7
The Landscape Garden (Poe) 216
Landscape Narrative (Potteiger and Purinton) 
69–70
landscape narratives 5, 10, 28; authoring 
198–199; benefits of 228; composition 228; 
considerations on writing 227–228; context 
and grammar in 95; designer-as-author 153–
154, 180; healing garden narratives 221–222; 
Morning Star Boys Ranch narrative 222–224; 
and motion 97; preparing to write 211–220; 
sample narratives 221; unfolding 239–241; 
writing 220–221
Landscape Narratives (Potteiger and Purinton) 172
Landscape Review 14, 67, 163
landscapes: appropriate 147; comprehensible 
147; design 3, 4, 7, 8, 18, 20, 25–26; as 
designed landscapes 12, 13, 29, 135; designers 
13–14; as four dimensional 27; painters 
10; reading 167–173; sincere 147; tension 
produced 113; true and factually correct 147; 
visual signs in 40–41; as written text 60, 76, 
149, 212–213
landscape’s grain 112
landscape narrative 5, 8–11, 14, 15, 24, 28–31, 
34, 35, 42, 46, 52, 64, 67, 69, 75, 93, 95, 97, 
120, 121, 126, 127, 144–147, 150, 154–156, 
160, 172, 180–186, 189, 190, 192–196, 
198–199, 203–205, 209–212, 220, 239–241, 
254, 274; three levels or realms 12, 18, 70, 83, 
85, 148, 183; used in two ways 15, 184
land use character 19, 105
Lane, Fitz Hugh 69, 70
293
Langer, Susan 73
language: as basis of The Analogy 3, 4, 5, 7, 
8, 14, 18, 20, 20–23; boundaries 178; tacit 
understanding of 22, 167
Language of Landscape (Spirn) 265
Lao Tzu 140, 152
Laseau, Paul 190
Latin American Studies 148
Lawrence, D. H. 271
Learning to Labor: how working class kids get 
working class jobs (Willis) 260
Leaves of Grass (Whitman) 91
Lefebvre, Henri 9, 34, 140, 205
legibility 111
Le Guin, Ursula 73, 86
Ley, D. 34, 185
Life Is a Miracle: An Essay Against Modern 
Superstition (Berry) 272
Light, A. 160
lines 73–99; act as boundaries and edges 77, 
97; context-driven shapes 81–86; context 
of 78; defining areas 88–93; explicit 75, 76; 
figure-ground substance 86–88; Kandinsky’s 
thinking 80; physical attributes 79–81; and 
points 74; power of 96–98; step-by-step 
growth of 75; variations 80
Little Dry Creek (Colorado) 188
Lopez, Barry 33, 75, 269, 274–275
Luckmann, T. 197, 198
Lynch, Kevin 25, 64, 77, 79, 80, 81, 201–204, 
211, 243, 271; on edges and boundaries 97; 
legibility concept 111; seams 88, 96;  
seven-step design process 204–205
Machu Pichu 165
Mad Magazine 149
Mann, William 41
Manning’s formula 187, 191
manufactured overhead planes 125–126
Marx, Burle 108
Marxist writings 180
Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs 29, 30, 39, 
191, 205
McPhee, John 3
meaning content, and narrative 197–198
meanings 26–35
Meinig, D. W. 184
Mesa Verde 165
message boundaries 34
message media 163–165
messages 26–35; and points 66–69
Metheny, K. B. 41
Michelangelo 172
Michener, James 165
Mitchell, W. J. T. 154–155
Modern style 179
Moore, Henry 172
Morning Star Boys Ranch narrative 222–224
motion 82; and landscape narrative 97; personal 
85; public 85
Motloch, J. 245, 252
Movies of the Mind (Rae) 193, 204, 212
Muir, J. 33
Nabokov, P. 60
“The Naked City” 154
narrative 26–35, 173–180; anticipated 
experiences 12, 18, 76, 134, 186, 200, 267; 
archetypes 10–11, 29, 42, 165–166, 174; 
associated with a place or artifact 28, 172; 
authoring landscape 198–199; benefits of 228; 
collective unconscious 10–11, 29–30, 34, 41, 
75, 148, 155, 254; considerations on writing 
227–228; descriptive 12; design 181; design 
principles as applied to 151–153; design 
process 200–206; experienced as traversing 
a place 42, 82, 116, 144; healing garden 
221–222; influence of vertical features 91, 
116–117, 119, 120, 140, 174, 243; landscape 
(see landscape narratives); leading to 153–156; 
meaning content 197–198; meaningfulhistorical place 134, 188; message media  
163–165; messages read as crossing a 
landscape 135; most immediate messages 
112; most subtle yet most enduring 11, 
42, 48; narrative basics 165–167; narrative 
structure 180–182; orientation as individual/
family, regional/national and human 68–70, 
176; parts of 193–195; personal evolution 
182–185; place making as 195–197; practical, 
fundamental 163–165, 195–197; preparing 
to write 211–220; read at eye level 14, 
19, 24, 67, 105, 116, 119, 126–127, 133, 
135, 142, 240–241; reading the landscape 
294
167–173; relating narrative structure to design 
process 188–190; sample 221; sequential and 
additive 3, 5, 10, 60, 75, 145; social cultural, 
period & place 24, 150; storytelling as form 
of 5; topography 84, 112, 161, 191, 251; 
transformation and self-regulation 190–193; 
transitory 42; typical design process 199–200; 
wholeness 185–188; as written text 45, 60, 76, 
149, 212–213
narrative-storyboard-design approach  
11–13, 15, 25, 155, 180, 190, 192,  
203, 206, 210, 212, 214, 224, 233, 241–242, 
245–248, 263–264, 266–267, 269; benefits  
of 245–248
narrative-storyboard-final design  
process 13
narrative-storyboards 242–245
narrative structure 180–182; Chatman 183, 185, 
193, 195; composition of 193; Conron 28, 
106–107, 119, 148, 183–184; contingency 
93; Giddens 34, 42–44, 184, 195–196; 
Habermas 145, 181–182, 195; not yet 
certain 93; Pouillon 93; recursive nature 43; 
relating to design process 188–190; spatial 
relationships in literature 106–107; story and 
discourse 34, 153, 184; structuration theory 
42, 44, 170, 195; validity claims  
43–44, 195
narrative theory 194, 194
National Endowment of the Arts 149
National Science Foundation 149
Native American Architecture (Nabokov and 
Easton) 60
Native American tribes 61
netting 87, 89, 118–119
The New Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain 
(Edwards) 103
Newton, Norman 41
New World 171
Niagara (painting) 238, 238
non-Marxist writings 180
Norberg-Schulz, C. 35, 41, 124, 125, 151
Norman’s Woe (Lane) 69, 70
O’Connor, Flannery 212
Olmsted, Frederick Law 173, 180
“On Death and Dying” (Kübler-Ross) 227
On Track Academy (OTA) 262–263
The Origin of the Species (Darwin) 86
overhead planes 101, 122–132; mechanics and 
design 130–132; overview 122–124; and sky 
124–125; types of 125–130
The Pace Gallery 233
Paley, William 213
paragraph as plane: combined to make 
volumetric/landscape spaces 143–144; ground 
plane 101, 106–109; overhead plane 101, 
122–132; vertical planes 101, 116–122
Pattern Language (Alexander) 57, 143,  
151–153
A Pattern Language: Towns, Building, and 
Construction (Alexander) 21
pedestrian spaces 90
“Performance Zoning” 188
personal evolution, and narrative 182–185
person-centered design approach 19
Piaget, J. 190–191, 194
The Pit and the Pendulum (Poe) 10, 170
place making as narrative 195–197
planes: compact 101; curvature 114; described 
101; features 101, 101; ground 101, 106–116; 
overhead 101, 122–132; types of 101; vertical 
101, 116–122
Poe, Edgar Allen 10, 91, 169–170,  
201, 216
Poetics of Gardens (Moore) 125
The Poetry Home Repair Manual: practical advice 
for beginning poets (Kooser) 214
point(s): and contrast 56; dynamics associated 
with 55; as energy gatherer 58–59; exploration 
of 55; implicit and explicit 68; and 
information communication 57; and lines 
74; as objects 61; as organizer of space 51, 
55, 62–63, 70; power of 58–66; in space 56; 
subtle messages 66–69; vertical 62
The Point 56
Pollan, Michael 66
Porter, Harry 26–27, 29, 34, 182
Post Modern 179
Potteiger, M. 42, 69–70, 172
Pouillon, Jean 93
power: accepting 258; designer’s 258
Pratt, Geraldine 28
295
Providence Sacred Heart Medical Center Garden 
Project 224–225
Purinton, J. 42, 69–70, 172
Rae, Colleen Mariah 12–13, 193–194, 204, 209, 
212–213, 217, 219, 257; let your characters 
go 212, 220
“Rain” (Williams) 51
randomness 38
Rapoport, A. 42, 185
Rapoport’s “cues” 35
Reading the Landscape of America (Watts) 168
recursive actions as speech acts 196
recursive character of social life 35, 185
Reflective Practitioner (Schon) 19
The Reflective Practitioner (Schon) 258, 265
Reps, John 83, 178
river analogy 82, 83
Romanesque style 10, 179
Rose, Todd 264
Rowles, G. 35
Rubin, D. 181, 185, 194
Rubin’s “constraint” 35
Rudofsky, B. 74
sample narratives 221
Samuels, Marwyn 159
scaling 91
Scarfo, Bob 188, 189, 265
Schon, Don 258–260, 262; normative design 
domains 261
Schon, Donald 19
“Schoolrooms, Pupils, and Rules: The Role of 
Informality in Bureaucratic Socialization” 
(Sieber) 260
Scorcese, Martin 233
seams 88, 96; edges as 97
Sedona’s Chapel of the Holy Cross 162, 162
self-regulation: and narrative 190–193; and 
transformation 190–193
semantic fields 198
semantics 95, 177
A Sense of Place, a Sense of Time (Jackson) 275
Sense of Unity (Ardalan and Bakhtiar) 123
sentence as line: boundaries 77, 97; edges 77, 
97; message delivery 187; paths/roads/lanes 
74–78, 80; seams 88, 96
sequence of volumes 42, 119
serial vision 10, 119, 136, 145, 146, 151,  
153–154, 163
shakkei 119, 126
shapes: context-driven 81–86; see also specific 
shapes
Sharpe, W. 179
shitty first drafts 13, 220, 229, 241
“Shitty First Drafts” (Lamott) 220
Sieber, Tim 187, 260
Simonds, John 12, 19, 34, 70, 113, 140, 
182, 211, 245; design for experiences 242; 
epiphany 19, 211, 236, 245, 269; realization 
34, 152, 182, 211; river analogy 82, 83; 
stream and pedestrian traffic analogy 84
Site Planning (Lynch) 201, 204
Sitte, Camillo 63–64, 124, 142, 243
Sketches of Etruscan Places (Lawrence) 271
SketchUp (computer program) 142
Skinner, B. F. 180
sky planes 127, 128
Smith, J. 160
Smith, Webb 232
Snyder, Gary 33
social production of spaces 3, 9, 19, 34, 38, 
140, 177, 182, 186, 197, 224, 260, 261; 
John Simonds’ realization 34, 152, 182, 211; 
person-centered design 19
Solitude: a return to self (Storr) 212
Sommer, R. 105
The Source (Michener) 165
space(s) 4; additive nature of 10; associated with 
landmarks 65; pedestrian 90; points in 56; 
as social product 3, 9, 19, 34, 38, 140, 177, 
182, 186, 197, 224, 260, 261; within spaces 
145; textural organization in 148–151; and 
time 14; volumetric 7, 10, 106, 134, 142, 
151–152, 160, 167, 239, 246
speech acts, recursive actions as 196
Sphereland (Burger) 106
Spirit of Place 271
Spirn, Anne Whiston 265
Stea, D. 105
Stonehenge 165, 165
Storr, Anthony 212
storyboards/storyboarding 12–13, 232–233; 
approach 13, 15; beekeeper 232; benefits 
296
of 245–248; and computers 235; design 
criteria for 236–239; Disney 232–233; final 
approach 241–242; freehand or computer 
235; landscape narrative unfolding 239–241; 
refining 12; sketches 13, 202–203, 224; and 
student narrative 233–235; student’s simple 
storyboard panel 234; turning into design 
242–245; various design processes 245
storytelling 94, 163, 186; Chatman on 193; 
design narratives 181; as form of narrative 5
Storytelling for Landscape Architecture 160, 241
structuration theory 42, 44, 170, 184–185, 195
student narrative and storyboard 233–235
student’s simple storyboard panel 234
syllables 46–47, 49–51
tacit understanding of language 22, 167
Tao Te Ching (Lao Tzu) 140, 152
“Ten Versions of the Same Scene” (Meinig) 184
Terrain Analysis (Way) 134, 168
Tesla, Nikola 102
textural organization in space and time 148–151
theme: message boundaries 34; recursive 
character of social life 35, 185
Thiel 139
This Trade of Writing (Week) 215
Thoreau, H. D. 3, 33, 269–270
three-dimensional volume 6, 10, 21, 143
time, and textural organization 148–151
The Timeless Way of Building 151
Time Magazine 45
topography 84, 112, 161, 191, 251
Town Planning in Frontier America (Reps) 83
transformation: narrative 190–193; and selfregulation 190–193
Trees in Urban Design (Arnold) 125
Treib, Marc 177
Tuan, Yi-fu 122, 168
Tumminello, W. 232
Twain, Mark 17
two-dimensional planes 6, 19, 39, 102–105, 
118, 139, 143
typical design process 199–200
typology, attributes of 44–52
unconscious: collective 10, 11, 30, 41, 75, 148, 
155; and writers 213
Uniform National Exam (UNE) 201
Urban, James 206
urban open space with trees as edge 244
user-as-reader 3–4, 7, 15, 93–95, 112, 134, 154, 
184, 195, 206, 210
validity claims 43–44, 195
vegetative planes 127–130, 134
Vernon, N. D. 254
vertical planes 101, 116–122; ambiance 120; 
attributes of 119–120; setting to detail 120–
122; strength of 118
vertical points 62
Victorian style 179
Vietnam Veterans Memorial 30, 31
Vintage Lopez (Lopez) 274
Vischer, Robert 159
Visions of the Modern City (Sharpe and  
Wallock) 179
visual perception 240
visual signs 40–41
The Voice 189
volumetric spaces 7, 10, 106, 134, 139–140, 
142, 151–152, 160, 167, 239, 246; design 
principles as applied to 151–153
Walden (Thoreau) 270
walking 86
Wallock, L. 179
Walt Disney 232–233
Wanderlust: A History of Walking (Solnit) 85
warped ground planes 114
Washington Monument, Washington  
55, 55
Watts, May Theilgaard 73, 168
Way, Doug 134, 168
The Way 152
Week, Edward 215
West African Swept Yards 179
Wester, Lari 117, 190
Whitman, Walt 91
wholeness 15, 180–181, 185–192, 194; narrative 
185–188
Whyte, W. H. 74
Williams, Carlos 51
Williams, R. 37
Willis, Paul 260–261
Wong, Wicius 81, 83
Wood, D. 34, 43
297
word as point 6–7; point as energy gatherer  
58–59; point as organizer of space 51, 55, 
62–63, 70; read by the five senses 55
word-point-landscape object 7
word-point-object metaphor 6
writing a narrative 18, 183, 189, 204, 224, 
227–228; Kooser, know someone will read it 
209–212; Lamott, shitty first drafts 13, 220, 
229, 241; Rae, let your characters go 212, 
220; read it aloud 214; refine 205
Yahoo 211
Yamin, R. 41
Yates, Frances M. 218
Zen 179
Zion, Bob 213
Zion Breen Richardson Associates 213
Zube, E. 42
Zube, M. 42
Zucker, Paul 64, 74
